--- Page 1 --- Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8 Draft Ok to PrintAH XSL/XML Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______ Page 1 of 143 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. TAX GUIDE2024 Get forms and other information faster and easier at: •IRS.gov (English) •IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) •IRS.gov/Chinese (中文 ) •IRS.gov/Korean (한국어 ) •IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) •IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) Publication 17 (2024) Catalog Number 10311G Jan 22, 2025 Department of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service www.irs.govYour Federal Income Tax For IndividualsPublication 17 For use in preparing 2024 Returns --- Page 2 --- Page 2 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Your Federal Income Tax For Individuals Contents What's New ....................... 1 Reminders ........................ 2 Introduction ....................... 3 Part One. The Income Tax Return .......... 6 1Filing Information ................ 6 2Filing Status ................... 21 3Dependents ................... 27 4T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax ..... 37 Part Two. Income and Adjustments to Income ..................... 46 5Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... 47 6Interest Income ................. 54 7Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits .............. 62 8Other Income .................. 67 9Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) ..................... 78 Part Three. Standard Deduction, Itemized Deductions, and Other Deductions ...... 93 10 Standard Deduction .............. 9311 T axes ...................... 97 12 Other Itemized Deductions ......... 101 Part Four. Figuring Your Taxes, and Refundable and Nonrefundable Credits ..107 13 How T o Figure Y our T ax ........... 107 14 Child T ax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents ................. 109 2024 Tax Table ..................... 112 2024 Tax Computation Worksheet ........ 124 2024 Tax Rate Schedules .............. 125 Your Rights as a Taxpayer ............. 127 How To Get Tax Help ................. 128 Index .......................... 131 Where To File ..................... 141 The explanations and examples in this publication reflect the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of: •T ax laws enacted by Congress, •T reasury regulations, and •Court decisions. However, the information given does not cover every situation and is not intended to replace the law or change its meaning.All material in this publication may be reprinted freely. A citation to Y our Federal Income T ax (2024) would be appropriate.This publication covers some subjects on which a court may have made a decision more favorable to taxpayers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until these differing interpretations are resolved by higher court decisions or in some other way, this publication will continue to present the interpretations by the IRS. All taxpayers have important rights when working with the IRS. These rights are described in Y our Rights as a T axpayer in the back of this publication. --- Page 3 --- Page 3 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. What's New This section summarizes important tax changes that took effect in 2024. Most of these changes are discussed in more detail throughout this publication. Future developments. For the latest information about the tax law topics covered in this publication, such as legislation enacted after it was published, go to IRS.gov/ Pub17 . Who must file. Generally, the amount of income you can receive before you must file a return has been increased. For more informa- tion, see chapter 1 , later. Due date of return. File Form 1040 or 1040-SR by April 15, 2025. See chapter 1 , later. Additonal child tax credit (ACTC) amount increased. The maximum ACTC amount has in- creased to $1,700 for each qualify- ing child. Standard deduction amount in- creased. For 2024, the standard deduction amount has been in- creased for all filers. The amounts are: •Single or Married filing sepa- rately—$14,600; •Married filing jointly or Qualify- ing surviving spouse—$29,200; and •Head of household—$21,900. See chapter 10 , later. Digital assets received as ordi- nary income. If you received dig- ital assets as ordinary income, and that income is not reported else- where on your return, you will enter those amounts on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8v. Reporting excessive payments, increase in tax, and recapture amounts related to certain in- vestment credits. If you reported an excessive payment, an increase in tax, and/or a recapture amount related to certain credits on Form 4255, Certain Credit Recapture, Excessive Payments, and Penal- ties, you will also need to report those amounts on Schedule 2 (Form 1040). See the instructions for Form 4255 and Schedule 2, lines 1d, 1e, 1f, 1y, 17a, 17z, and 19. Repayment amount from Form 8936. If you have a repayment of the credit for new or previously owned clean vehicles reported on Form 8936 and Schedule A (Form 8936), those amounts will now be reported on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), lines 1b and 1c.Purchase of savings bonds dis- continued. The program allowing for your refund to be deposited into your T reasuryDirect® account to buy savings bonds, as well as the ability to buy paper bonds with your refund, has been discontinued. Form 8888 is now only used to split your direct deposit refund between two or more accounts or to split your refund between a direct de- posit and a paper check. For more information, go to T reasuryDirect.gov/Research- Center/Faq-IRS- T ax-Feature . U.S. tax allocable to the U.S. Vir- gin Islands now reported on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 13z. If you use Form 8689, Al- location of Individual Income T ax to the U.S. Virgin Islands, to figure your amount of U.S. tax allocable to the U.S. Virgin Islands, you will now report this amount on Sched- ule 3 (Form 1040), line 13z. Choosing to treat nonresident alien or dual -status alien spouse as U.S. resident. If you and your spouse choose to treat a nonresident alien or dual -status alien spouse as a U.S. resident for 2024, or if a prior year's choice to treat a nonresident alien spouse as a U.S. resident remains in effect for 2024, check the box in the Filing Status section of the Form 1040 or 1040- SR and enter the name of the nonresident alien or dual -status alien spouse in the entry space. See chapter 1 , later. Reporting a transfer of a credit for a new or previously owned clean vehicle credit to a dealer at the time of sale. If you pur- chased a new or used clean vehi- cle from a registered dealer and re- duced the amount you paid at the time of sale by transferring the credit to the dealer, you must file a tax return and attach Form 8936 and Schedule A (Form 8936) to re- port the transfer of the credit and reconcile your eligibility on your re- turn. Certain relief payments made to individuals affected by the East Palestine train derailment are not taxable. If you received relief payments from a government agency, Norfolk Southern Railway, or its subsidiary, insurer, agent, or a related person due to being af- fected by the February 3, 2023, East Palestine, Ohio, train derail- ment, these payments may be non- taxable. See Pub. 547 for more in- formation. Qualified wildfire relief pay- ments are not taxable. If you re- ceived a qualified wildfire relief payment, those payments may be nontaxable. See Pub. 547 for more information. Surviving spouse election to be treated as employee. Beginning in 2024, a surviving spouse who is the designated beneficiary of an employee covered by a qualified retirement plan (or other plan to which the required minimum distri- bution rules apply) or who is the designated beneficiary of an IRA owner, may elect to be treated as the employee for purposes of the required minimum distribution rules. See Pub. 575 and Pub. 590-B. Wage limitation for pre -tax catch- up contributions. If you are an eligible participant in an ap- plicable employer plan, you may make pre -tax catch -up contribu- tions only if your wages from the employer sponsoring the plan did not exceed $145,000. IRA contribution limit increased. Beginning in 2024, the IRA contri- bution limit is increased to $7,000 ($8,000 for individuals age 50 or older) from $6,500 ($7,500 for indi- viduals age 50 or older). Distributions to victims of do- mestic abuse. Beginning with distributions made after December 31, 2023, a distribution to a do- mestic abuse victim is not subject to the 10% additional tax on early distributions if the distribution meets certain requirements. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Distributions for emergency personal expenses. Beginning with distributions made after De- cember 31, 2023, the exception to the 10% additional tax for early dis- tributions is expanded to include distributions for certain emergency personal expenses. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Deferred compensation contri- bution limit increased. If you participate in a 401(k) plan, 403(b) plan, or the federal government’s Thrift Savings Plan, the total an- nual amount you can contribute is increased to $23,000 ($30,500 if age 50 or older) for 2024. This also applies to most section 457 plans. 2024 is the last year to file Form 5405. The 15 -year repayment pe- riod for the first -time homebuyer credit for homes purchased in 2008 began with your 2010 tax re- turn and ends with your 2024 tax return. Nontaxable Medicaid waiver payments reported on Form(s) W-2. If you received nontaxable Medicaid waiver payments, those amounts should now be reported to you on Form(s) W -2 in box 12, code II. Direct File. Direct File is a perma- nent option for taxpayers to file fed- eral tax returns online —for free— directly and securely with the IRS starting in 2025. Go to IRS.gov/DirectFile . Direct File is a filing option for taxpayers in partici- pating states who have relatively simple tax returns reporting only certain types of income and claim- ing certain credits and deductions. Go to IRS.gov/DirectFile for infor- mation about additional states who've joined, and the new tax sit- uations Direct File added to the service for the 2024 tax year. Health flexible spending ar- rangements (health FSAs) un- der cafeteria plans. For tax years beginning in 2024, the dollar limita- tion under section 1251(i) on volun- tary employee salary reductions for contributions to health FSAs is $3,200. Delayed refund for returns claiming the ACTC. The IRS can- not issue refunds before mid -Feb- ruary 2025 for returns that properly claim the ACTC. This time frame applies to the entire refund, not just the portion associated with the ACTC. Standard mileage rate. The 2024 rate for business use of a ve- hicle is 67 cents a mile. The 2024 rate for use of your vehicle to do volunteer work for certain charita- ble organizations is 14 cents a mile. The 2024 rate for operating expenses for a car when you use it for medical reasons is 21 cents a mile. Modified adjusted gross income (AGI) limit for traditional IRA contributions. For 2024, if you are covered by a retirement plan at work, your deduction for contribu- tions to a traditional IRA is reduced (phased out) if your modified AGI is: •More than $123,000 but less than $143,000 for a married couple filing a joint return or a qualifying surviving spouse, •More than $77,000 but less than $87,000 for a single indi- vidual or head of household, or •Less than $10,000 for a mar- ried individual filing a separate return. If you either live with your spouse or file a joint return, and your spouse is covered by a retirement Publication 17 (2024) 1 --- Page 4 --- Page 4 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. plan at work but you aren't, your deduction is phased out if your modified AGI is more than $230,000 but less than $240,000. If your modified AGI is $240,000 or more, you can't take a deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA. See How Much Can Y ou De- duct in chapter 9 , later. Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributions. For 2024, your Roth IRA contribution limit is re- duced (phased out) in the following situations. •Y our filing status is married fil- ing jointly or qualifying surviv- ing spouse and your modified AGI is at least $230,000. Y ou can't make a Roth IRA contri- bution if your modified AGI is $240,000 or more. •Y our filing status is single, head of household, or married filing separately and you didn't live with your spouse at any time in 2024 and your modi- fied AGI is at least $146,000. Y ou can't make a Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI is $161,000 or more. •Y our filing status is married fil- ing separately, you lived with your spouse at any time dur- ing the year, and your modi- fied AGI is more than zero. Y ou can't make a Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI is $10,000 or more. See Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth IRA in chapter 9 , later. 2025 modified AGI limits. Y ou can find information about the 2025 contribution and modified AGI lim- its in Pub. 590-A. Tax law changes for 2025. When you figure how much income tax you want withheld from your pay and when you figure your estima- ted tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2025. For more infor- mation, see Pub. 505. Alternative minimum tax (AMT) exemption amount increased. The AMT exemption amount is in- creased to $85,700 ($133,300 if married filing jointly or qualifying surviving spouse; $66,650 if mar- ried filing separately). The income levels at which the AMT exemption begins to phase out have in- creased to $609,350 ($1,218,700 if married filing jointly or qualifying surviving spouse). New reporting requirements for Form 1099 -K. The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the ARP) changed the reporting require- ments for third -party settlement or- ganizations. Beginning in 2024, there are lower reporting thresholds for Form 1099 -K. See chapter 8 , later.Updated reporting requirements for Form 1099 -K. For 2024, pay- ment card companies, payment apps, and online marketplaces will be required to send you a Form 1099- K when the amount of your business transactions during the year is more than $5,000. In calen- dar year 2025, the threshold will lower to more than $2,500; and for 2026 and later years, the threshold will be more than $600. Changes to reporting amounts from Form 1099 -K. Beginning in 2024, if you received a Form(s) 1099- K that shows payments that were included in error or for per- sonal items sold at a loss, you will now enter these amounts in the en- try space at the top of Schedule 1 (Form 1040). Reminders Listed below are important reminders and other items that may help you file your 2024 tax return. Many of these items are explained in more detail later in this publication. Special rules for eligible gains invested in Qualified Opportu- nity Funds. If you have an eligible gain, you can invest that gain into a Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF) and elect to defer part or all of the gain that is otherwise includible in income. The gain is deferred until the date you sell or exchange the investment or December 31, 2026, whichever is earlier. Y ou may also be able to permanently exclude gain from the sale or exchange of an investment in a QOF if the in- vestment is held for at least 10 years. For information about what types of gains entitle you to elect these special rules, see the In- structions for Schedule D (Form 1040). For information on how to elect to use these special rules, see the Instructions for Form 8949. Secure your tax records from identity theft. Identity theft occurs when someone uses your personal information, such as your name, SSN, or other identifying informa- tion, without your permission, to commit fraud or other crimes. An identity thief may use your SSN to get a job or may file a tax return us- ing your SSN to receive a refund. For more information about identity theft and how to reduce your risk from it, see chapter 1 , later. Taxpayer identification num- bers. Y ou must provide the tax- payer identification number for each person for whom you claim certain tax benefits. This applies even if the person was born in 2024. Generally, this number is the person's SSN. See chapter 1 , later. Filing status name changed to qualifying surviving spouse. The filing status qualifying widow(er) is now called qualifying surviving spouse. The rules for the filing status have not changed. The same rules that applied for qualify- ing widow(er) apply to qualifying surviving spouse. Lines 1a through 1z on Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR. Beginning in 2022, line 1 was expanded and there are new lines 1a through 1z. Some amounts that in prior years were reported on Form 1040, and some amounts reported on Form 1040- SR, are now reported on Schedule 1. •Scholarships and fellowship grants are now reported on Schedule 1, line 8r. •Pension or annuity from a nonqualified deferred com- pensation plan or a non-gov- ernmental section 457 plan are now reported on Schedule 1, line 8t. •Wages earned while incarcer- ated are now reported on Schedule 1, line 8u. Line 6c on Forms 1040 and 1040-SR. A checkbox was added on line 6c. T axpayers who elect to use the lump -sum election method for their benefits will check this box. See the Instructions for Form 1040. Premium tax credit (PTC). The ARP expanded the PTC by eliminating the limitation that a tax- payer's household income may not exceed 400% of the federal poverty line and generally increases the credit amounts. For more informa- tion, see Pub. 974 and Form 8962 and its instructions. Credits for qualified sick and family leave wages. The credits for qualified sick and family leave wages paid in 2023 for leave taken before April 1, 2021, and for leave taken after March 31, 2021, and before October 1, 2021, are now reported on Schedule 3, line 13z. See Schedule H (Form 1040) for more information. Qualified charitable distribution one- time election. Beginning in 2023, you can elect to make a one- time distribution up to $50,000 from an individual retirement ac- count to charities through a charita- ble remainder unitrust, or a charita- ble gift annuity funded only by qualified distributions. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Self- employed health insurance deduction. Use Form 7206 and its instructions to determine any amount of the self -employed health insurance deduction you may be able to claim and report on Sched- ule 1 (Form 1040), line 17. Identity verification. The IRS launched an improved identity veri- fication and sign -in process that enables more people to securely access and use IRS online tools and applications. T o provide verifi- cation services, the IRS is using ID.me, a trusted technology pro- vider. The new process is one more step the IRS is taking to en- sure that taxpayer information is provided only to the person who le- gally has a right to the data. T ax- payers using the new mo- bile- friendly verification procedure can gain entry to existing IRS on- line services such as the Child T ax Credit Update Portal , Online Ac- count , Get T ranscript Online , Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN) , and Online Payment Agreement . Additional IRS applications will transition to the new method over the next year. Each online service will also provide information that will instruct taxpayers on the steps they need to follow for access to the service. Y ou can also see IR-2021-228 for more information. Adoption credit. The adoption credit and the exclusion for em- ployer- provided adoption benefits are both $16,810 per eligible child in 2024. The amount begins to phase out if you have modified AGI in excess of $252,150 and is com- pletely phased out if your modified AGI is $292,150 or more. ACTC and bona fide residents of Puerto Rico. Bona fide resi- dents of Puerto Rico are no longer required to have three or more qualifying children to be eligible to claim the ACTC. Bona fide resi- dents of Puerto Rico may be eligi- ble to claim the ACTC if they have one or more qualifying children. Exception to the 10% additional tax for early distributions. The exception to the 10% additional tax for early distributions includes the following. •Distributions from a retirement plan in connection with feder- ally declared disasters. 2 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 5 --- Page 5 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. •Distribution from a retirement plan made to someone who is terminally ill. •Distributions to firefighters at age 50 or with 25 years of service under the plan. See Form 5329 and Pub. 590 -B for more information. New clean vehicle credit. The credit for new qualified plug -in electric drive motor vehicles has changed. This credit is now known as the clean vehicle credit. The maximum amount of the credit and some of the requirements to claim the credit have changed. The credit is still reported on Form 8936 and Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 6f. For more information, see Form 8936. Previously owned clean vehicle credit. This credit is available for previously owned clean vehicles acquired and placed in service af- ter 2022. For more information, see Form 8936. Reporting requirements for Form 1099 -K. Form 1099 -K is is- sued by third -party settlement or- ganizations and credit card compa- nies to report payment transactions made to you for goods and serv- ices. Y ou must report all income on your tax return unless excluded by law, whether you received the in- come electronically or not, and whether you received a Form 1099- K or not. The box 1a and other amounts reported on Form 1099- K are additional pieces of in- formation to help determine the correct amounts to report on your return. If you received a Form 1099 -K that shows payments you didn’t re- ceive or is otherwise incorrect, contact the Form 1099 -K issuer. Don’t contact the IRS; the IRS can’t correct an incorrect Form 1099 -K. If you can’t get it corrected, or you sold a personal item at a loss, see the instructions for Schedule 1, lines 8z and 24z, later, for more re- porting information. All IRS information about Form 1099- K is available by going to IRS.gov/1099K . Foreign- source income. If you are a U.S. citizen with income from sources outside the United States (foreign income), you must report all such income on your tax return unless it is exempt by law or a tax treaty. This is true whether you live inside or outside the United States and whether or not you receive a Form W -2 or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This applies to earned income (such as wages and tips) as well as unearned in- come (such as interest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, and royalties). If you live outside the United States, you may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign earned in- come. For details, see Pub. 54. Foreign financial assets. If you had foreign financial assets in 2024, you may have to file Form 8938 with your return. See Form 8938 and its instructions or go to IRS.gov/Form8938 for details. Automatic 6 -month extension to file tax return. Y ou can get an au- tomatic 6 -month extension of time to file your tax return. See chap- ter 1 , later. Payment of taxes. Y ou can pay your taxes by making electronic payments online; from a mobile de- vice using the IRS2Go app; or in cash, or by check or money order. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and faster than mailing in a check or money order. See chapter 1 , later.Faster ways to file your return. The IRS offers fast, accurate ways to file your tax return information without filing a paper tax return. Y ou can use IRS e-file (electronic filing). See chapter 1 , later. Free electronic filing. Y ou may be able to file your 2024 taxes on- line for free. See chapter 1 , later. Change of address. If you change your address, notify the IRS. See chapter 1 , later. Refund on a late -filed return. If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you must generally file your return within 3 years from the date the return was due (includ- ing extensions) to get that refund. See chapter 1 , later. Frivolous tax returns. The IRS has published a list of positions that are identified as frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous tax re- turn is $5,000. See chapter 1 , later. Filing erroneous claim for re- fund or credit. Y ou may have to pay a penalty if you file an errone- ous claim for refund or credit. See chapter 1 , later. Access your online account. Y ou must authenticate your identity. T o securely log into your federal tax account, go to IRS.gov/Account . View the amount you owe, review your last 5 years of payment his- tory, access online payment op- tions, and create or modify an on- line payment agreement. Y ou can also access your tax records on- line. Health care coverage. If you need health care coverage, go to HealthCare.gov to learn about health insurance options for you and your family, how to buy health insurance, and how you might qualify to get financial assistance to buy health insurance.Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Pa- perwork Reduction Act informa- tion. The IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 require that when we ask you for information, we must first tell you what our legal right is to ask for the information, why we are asking for it, how it will be used, what could happen if we do not receive it, and whether your response is voluntary, required to obtain a benefit, or mandatory un- der the law. A complete statement on this subject can be found in your tax form instructions. Preparer e-file mandate. Most paid preparers must e-file returns they prepare and file. Y our preparer may make you aware of this re- quirement and the options availa- ble to you. Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration. If you want to confidentially report misconduct, waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRS employee, you can call 800-366- 4484 (call 800 -877-8339 if you are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech disability, and are using TTY/TDD equipment). Y ou can remain anonymous. Photographs of missing chil- dren. The IRS is a proud partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing children selected by the Center may appear in this publication on pages that would otherwise be blank. Y ou can help bring these children home by looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843- 5678) if you recognize a child. Introduction This publication covers the general rules for filing a federal income tax return. It supplements the informa- tion contained in your tax form in- structions. It explains the tax law to make sure you pay only the tax you owe and no more. How this publication is ar- ranged. Pub. 17 closely follows Form 1040, U.S. Individual Income T ax Return, and Form 1040 -SR, U.S. T ax Return for Seniors, and their three Schedules 1 through 3. Pub. 17 is divided into four parts. Each part is further divided into chapters, most of which generally discuss one line of the form or one line of one of the three schedules. The introduction at the beginning of each part lists the schedule(s) discussed in that part. The table of contents inside the front cover, the introduction to each part, and the index in the back of the publication are useful tools to help you find the information you need. What is in this publication. This publication begins with the rules for filing a tax return. It explains: 1.Who must file a return, 2.When the return is due, 3.How to e-file your return, and 4.Other general information.It will help you identify which filing status you qualify for, whether you can claim any dependents, and whether the income you receive is taxable. The publication goes on to explain the standard deduction, the kinds of expenses you may be able to deduct, and the various kinds of credits you may be able to take to reduce your tax. Throughout this publication are examples showing how the tax law applies in typical situations. Also throughout this publication are flowcharts and tables that present tax information in an easy -to-un- derstand manner. Many of the subjects discussed in this publication are discussed in greater detail in other IRS publica- tions. References to those other publications are provided for your information. Icons. Small graphic symbols, or icons, are used to draw your at- tention to special information. See T able 1 for an explanation of each icon used in this publication. What is not covered in this pub- lication. Some material that you may find helpful is not included in this publication but can be found in Publication 17 (2024) 3 --- Page 6 --- Page 6 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. your tax form instructions booklet. This includes lists of: •Where to report certain items shown on information docu- ments, and •T ax T opics you can read at IRS.gov/T axT opics . If you operate your own busi- ness or have other self -employ- ment income, such as from baby- sitting or selling crafts, see the following publications for more in- formation. •Pub. 334, T ax Guide for Small Business. •Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide.•Pub. 587, Business Use of Y our Home. Help from the IRS. There are many ways you can get help from the IRS. These are explained un- der How T o Get T ax Help at the end of this publication. Comments and suggestions. We welcome your comments about this publication and suggestions for future editions. Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/FormComments . Or, you can write to the Internal Revenue Service, T ax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR -6526, Washington, DC 20224.Although we can’t respond indi- vidually to each comment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will consider your comments and suggestions as we revise our tax forms, instructions, and publi- cations. Don’t send tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above address. Getting answers to your tax questions. If you have a tax ques- tion not answered by this publica- tion or the How T o Get T ax Help section at the end of this publica- tion, go to the IRS Interactive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search feature or viewing the categories listed.Getting tax forms, instruc- tions, and publications. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download cur- rent and prior -year forms, instruc- tions, and publications. Ordering tax forms, instruc- tions, and publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order cur- rent forms, instructions, and publi- cations; call 800 -829- 3676 to order prior- year forms and instructions. The IRS will process your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can get forms and publications faster on- line. Publication 17 Changes Note. This publication does not cover the topics listed in the following table. Please see the primary publication. Chapter Removed Title of Chapter Primary Source 6 Tip Income Pub. 531, Reporting Tip Income 8 Dividends and Other Distributions Pub. 550, Investment Income and Expenses 9 Rental Income and Expenses Pub. 527, Residential Rental Property (Including Rental of Vacation Homes) 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income 13 Basis of Property Pub. 551, Basis of Assets 14 Sale of Property Pub. 550 15 Selling Y our Home Pub. 523, Selling Y our Home 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Pub. 550 18 Alimony Pub. 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals 19 Education-Related Adjustments Pub. 970, T ax Benefits for Education 20 Other Adjustments to Income Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses 22 Medical and Dental Expenses Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expenses 24 Interest Expense Pub. 550 Pub. 936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction 25 Charitable Contributions Pub. 561, Determining the Value of Donated Property Pub. 526, Charitable Contributions 26 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts 29 T ax on Unearned Income of Certain Minor ChildrenForm 8615, T ax for Certain Children Who Have Unearned Income 30 Child and Dependent Care Credit Pub. 503, Child and Dependent Care Expenses 31 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Schedule R (Form 1040), Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled 33 Education Credits Pub. 970 34 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Pub. 596, Earned Income Credit (EIC) 35 Premium T ax Credit Pub. 974, Premium T ax Credit (PTC) 36 Other Credits 4 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 7 --- Page 7 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. IRS mission. Provide America's taxpayers top -quality service by helping them understand and meet their tax responsibilities and en-force the law with integrity and fair- ness to all. T able 1. Legend of Icons Icon Explanation CAUTION! Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after this publication goes to print. An Internet site or an email address. An address you may need. RECORDS Items you should keep in your personal records. Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete and keep for your records. An important phone number. TIP Helpful information you may need. Publication 17 (2024) 5 --- Page 8 --- Part One. The Income Tax ReturnThe four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system. They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return. They also provide information about dependents, and discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file (electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax during the year: withholding and estimated tax. The Form 1040 and 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these chapters are: •Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income; and •Schedule 3, Part II, Other Payments and Refundable Credits. 1. Filing Information What's New Due date of return. File Form 1040 or 1040-SR by April 15, 2025. Who must file. Generally, the amount of in- come you can receive before you must file a re- turn has been increased. See T able 1 -1, T a- ble 1 -2, and T able 1 -3 for the specific amounts. Reminders File online. Rather than filing a return on pa- per, you may be able to file electronically using IRS e-file . For more information, see Why Should I File Electronically , later. Access your online account (individual tax- payers only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to se- curely access information about your federal tax account. •View the amount you owe and a break- down by tax year. •See payment plan details or apply for a new payment plan. •Make a payment, view 5 years of payment history and any pending or scheduled pay- ments. •Access your tax records, including key data from your most recent tax return, your economic impact payment amounts, and transcripts. •View digital copies of select notices from the IRS. •Approve or reject authorization requests from tax professionals. •View your address on file or manage your communication preferences.•Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to view the required identity authentication process. Change of address. If you change your ad- dress, you should notify the IRS. Y ou can use Form 8822 to notify the IRS of the change. See Change of Address , later, under What Happens After I File . Enter your social security number. Y ou must enter your social security number (SSN) in the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file a joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order as the names. Direct deposit of refund. Instead of getting a paper check, you may be able to have your re- fund deposited directly into your account at a bank or other financial institution. See Direct Deposit under Refunds , later. If you choose di- rect deposit of your refund, you may be able to split the refund among two or three accounts. Pay online or by phone. If you owe additional tax, you may be able to pay online or by phone. See How T o Pay , later. Installment agreement. If you can’t pay the full amount due with your return, you may ask to make monthly installment payments. See In- stallment Agreement , later, under Amount Y ou Owe . Y ou may be able to apply online for a pay- ment agreement if you owe federal tax, interest, and penalties. Automatic 6 -month extension. Y ou can get an automatic 6 -month extension to file your tax return if, no later than the date your return is due, you file Form 4868. See Automatic Exten- sion , later. Service in combat zone. Y ou are allowed ex- tra time to take care of your tax matters if you are a member of the Armed Forces who served in a combat zone, or if you served in a combat zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi- viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, under When Do I Have T o File . Adoption taxpayer identification number. If a child has been placed in your home for purpo- ses of legal adoption and you won't be able to get a social security number for the child in time to file your return, you may be able to get an adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN). For more information, see Social Security Num- ber (SSN) , later. Taxpayer identification number for aliens. If you or your dependent is a nonresident or resi- dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to get a social security number, file Form W -7, Ap- plication for IRS Individual T axpayer Identifica- tion Number, with the IRS. For more informa- tion, see Social Security Number (SSN) , later. Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) renewal. Some ITINs must be renewed. If you haven't used your ITIN on a U.S. tax re- turn at least once for tax years 2021, 2022, or 2023, it has expired and must be renewed if you need to file a U.S. federal tax return. Y ou don't need to renew your ITIN if you don't need to file a federal tax return. Y ou can find more informa- tion at IRS.gov/ITIN . Frivolous tax submissions. The IRS has published a list of positions that are identified as frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous tax re- turn is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty will ap- ply to other specified frivolous submissions. For more information, see Civil Penalties , later. Introduction This chapter discusses the following topics. •Whether you have to file a return. •How to file electronically. •How to file for free. •When, how, and where to file your return. •What happens if you pay too little or too much tax. •What records you should keep and how long you should keep them. •How you can change a return you have al- ready filed. Do I Have To File a Return? Y ou must file a federal income tax return if you are a citizen or resident of the United States or a resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing requirements for any of the following categories that apply to you. 1.Individuals in general. (There are special rules for individuals whose spouse has died, executors, administrators, legal rep- resentatives, U.S. citizens and residents living outside the United States, residents of Puerto Rico, and individuals with income from U.S. territories.)Page 8 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 9 --- 2.Dependents. 3.Certain children under age 19 or full-time students. 4.Self-employed persons. 5.Aliens. The filing requirements for each category are explained in this chapter. The filing requirements apply even if you don't owe tax. Even if you don't have to file a return, it may be to your advantage to do so. See Who Should File , later. File only one federal income tax return for the year regardless of how many jobs you had, how many Forms W -2 you received, or how many states you lived in during the year. Don't file more than one original return for the same year, even if you haven’t re- ceived your refund or haven’t heard from the IRS since you filed. Individuals—In General If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you must file a return depends on three factors. 1.Y our gross income. 2.Y our filing status. 3.Y our age. T o find out whether you must file, see T a- ble 1 -1, T able 1 -2, and T able 1 -3. Even if no ta- ble shows that you must file, you may need to file to get money back. See Who Should File , later. Gross income. This includes all income you receive in the form of money, goods, property, and services that isn't exempt from tax. It also includes income from sources outside the Uni- ted States or from the sale of your main home (even if you can exclude all or part of it). Include part of your social security benefits if: 1.Y ou were married, filing a separate return, and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2024; or 2.Half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax-ex- empt interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If either (1) or (2) applies, see the Instructions for Form 1040 or Pub. 915 to figure the social security benefits you must include in gross in- come. Common types of income are discussed in Part T wo of this publication. Community property states. Community property states include Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, T exas, Washington, and Wisconsin. If you and your spouse lived in a community property state, you must usually follow state law to determine what is community property and what is separate in- come. For details, see Form 8958 and Pub. 555. TIP CAUTION!Nevada, Washington, and California do- mestic partners. A registered domestic part- ner in Nevada, Washington, or California must generally report half the combined community income of the individual and their domestic partner. See Pub. 555. Self- employed individuals. If you are self- employed, your gross income includes the amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business; and line 9 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Persons , later, for more information about your filing requirements. If you don't report all of your self -em- ployment income, your social security benefits may be lower when you retire. Filing status. Y our filing status depends on whether you are single or married and on your family situation. Y our filing status is determined on the last day of your tax year, which is De- cember 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for an explanation of each filing status. Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the year, you can generally have a higher amount of gross income than other taxpayers before you must file. See T able 1 -1. Y ou are considered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam- ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2025, you are considered 65 for 2024. CAUTION!Surviving Spouses, Executors, Administrators, and Legal Representatives Y ou must file a final return for a decedent (a per- son who died) if both of the following are true. •Y our spouse died in 2024 or you are the executor, administrator, or legal represen- tative. •The decedent met the filing requirements at the date of death. For more information on rules for filing a de- cedent's final return, see Pub. 559. U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Living Abroad T o determine whether you must file a return, in- clude in your gross income any income you re- ceived abroad, including any income you can exclude under the foreign earned income exclu- sion. For information on special tax rules that may apply to you, see Pub. 54. It is available on- line and at most U.S. embassies and consu- lates. See How T o Get T ax Help in the back of this publication. Residents of Puerto Rico If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico, you must generally file a U.S. income tax return for any year in which you meet the income requirements. This is in addition to any legal requirement you may have to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.T able 1-1. 2024 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers IF your filing status is...AND at the end of 2024 you were...*THEN file a return if your gross income was at least...** Single under 65 $14,600 65 or older $16,550 Married filing jointly *** under 65 (both spouses) $29,200 65 or older (one spouse) $30,750 65 or older (both spouses) $32,300 Married filing separately any age $5 Head of household under 65 $21,900 65 or older $23,850 Qualifying surviving spouse under 65 $29,200 65 or older $30,750 * If you were born on January 1, 1960, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2024. (If your spouse died in 2024 or if you are preparing a return for someone who died in 2024, see Pub. 501.) ** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that isn't exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States or from the sale of your main home (even if you can exclude part or all of it). Don't include any social security benefits unless (a) you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2024, or (b) one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the Instructions for Form 1040 or Pub. 915 to figure the taxable part of social security benefits you must include in gross income. Gross income includes gains, but not losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from a business means, for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F , line 9. But, in figuring gross income, don't reduce your income by any losses, including any loss on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F , line 9. *** If you didn't live with your spouse at the end of 2024 (or on the date your spouse died) and your gross income was at least $5, you must file a return regardless of your age.Page 9 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 7 --- Page 10 --- If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico for the entire year, your U.S. gross income doesn't include income from sources within Puerto Rico. It does, however, include any in- come you received for your services as an em- ployee of the United States or a U.S. agency. If you receive income from Puerto Rican sources that isn't subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your standard deduction. As a result, the amount of income you must have before you are required to file a U.S. income tax return is lower than the applicable amount in T able 1 -1 or T a- ble 1 -2. For more information, see Pub. 570. Individuals With Income From U.S. Territories If you had income from Guam, the Common- wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri- can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special rules may apply when determining whether you must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad- dition, you may have to file a return with the indi- vidual island government. See Pub. 570 for more information. Dependents If you are a dependent (one who meets the de- pendency tests in chapter 3 ), see T able 1 -2 to find out whether you must file a return. Y ou must also file if your situation is described in T a- ble 1 -3. Responsibility of parent. Generally, a child is responsible for filing their own tax return and for paying any tax on the return. If a dependent child must file an income tax return but can’t file due to age or any other reason, then a parent, guardian, or other legally responsible person must file it for the child. If the child can’t sign the return, the parent or guardian must sign the child's name followed by the words “By (your signature), parent for minor child.” Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns by performing services are included in the child’s gross income and not the gross income of the parent. This is true even if under local law the child's parent has the right to the earnings and may actually have received them. But if the child doesn't pay the tax due on this income, the pa- rent is liable for the tax. Certain Children Under Age 19 or Full-Time Students If a child's only income is interest and dividends (including capital gain distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund dividends), the child was un- der age 19 at the end of 2024 or was a full -time student under age 24 at the end of 2024, and certain other conditions are met, a parent can elect to include the child's income on the pa- rent's return. If this election is made, the child doesn't have to file a return. See Instructions for Form 8814, Parents’ Election T o Report Child’s Interest and Dividends.Self-Employed Persons Y ou are self-employed if you: •Carry on a trade or business as a sole pro- prietor, •Are an independent contractor, •Are a member of a partnership, or •Are in business for yourself in any other way. Self- employment can include work in addi- tion to your regular full -time business activities, such as certain part -time work you do at home or in addition to your regular job. Y ou must file a return if your gross income is at least as much as the filing requirement amount for your filing status and age (shown in T able 1 -1). Also, you must file Form 1040 or 1040- SR and Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment T ax, if: 1.Y our net earnings from self-employment (excluding church employee income) were $400 or more, or 2.Y ou had church employee income of $108.28 or more. (See T able 1 -3.) Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your self- employment tax. Self -employment tax is comparable to the social security and Medicare tax withheld from an employee's wages. For more information about this tax, see Pub. 334. Employees of foreign governments or in- ternational organizations. If you are a U.S. citizen who works in the United States for an in- ternational organization, a foreign government, or a wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign government, and your employer isn't required to withhold social security and Medicare taxes from your wages, you must include your earn- ings from services performed in the United States when figuring your net earnings from self-employment. Ministers. Y ou must include income from services you performed as a minister when fig- uring your net earnings from self -employment, unless you have an exemption from self -em- ployment tax. This also applies to Christian Sci- ence practitioners and members of a religious order who have not taken a vow of poverty. For more information, see Pub. 517. Aliens Y our status as an alien (resident, nonresident, or dual -status) determines whether and how you must file an income tax return. The rules used to determine your alien sta- tus are discussed in Pub. 519. Resident alien. If you are a resident alien for the entire year, you must file a tax return follow- ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens. Use the forms discussed in this publication. Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresident alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you are different from those that apply to U.S. citi- zens and resident aliens. See Pub. 519 to find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and which forms you should file.Dual- status taxpayer. If you are a resident alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident alien for the rest of the year, you are a dual -sta- tus taxpayer. Different rules apply for each part of the year. For information on dual -status tax- payers, see Pub. 519. Who Should File Even if you don't have to file, you should file a federal income tax return to get money back if any of the following conditions apply. 1.Y ou had federal income tax withheld or made estimated tax payments. 2.Y ou qualify for the earned income credit. See Pub. 596 for more information. 3.Y ou qualify for the additional child tax credit. See chapter 14 for more informa- tion. 4.Y ou qualify for the premium tax credit. See Pub. 974 for more information. 5.Y ou qualify for the American opportunity credit. See Pub. 970 for more information. See chapter 13 for more information. Form 1040 or 1040-SR Use Form 1040 or 1040 -SR to file your return. (But also see Why Should I File Electronically , later.) Y ou can use Form 1040 or 1040 -SR to re- port all types of income, deductions, and cred- its. Why Should I File Electronically? Electronic Filing If your adjusted gross income (AGI) is less than a certain amount, you are eligible for Free File , a free tax software service offered by IRS part- ners, to prepare and e-file your return for free. If your income is over the amount, you are still eli- gible for Free File Fillable Forms, an electronic version of IRS paper forms. T able 1 -4 lists the free ways to electronically file your return. Direct File, Free File, and Free Fillable Forms all provide eligible taxpayers the ability to e-file their taxes for free. See IRS.gov/DirectFile and IRS.gov/FreeFile for details and to see if you are eligible. IRS e-file uses automa- tion to replace most of the manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a result, the processing of e-file returns is faster and more accurate than the processing of paper returns. However, as with a paper return, you are responsible for making sure your return contains accurate information and is filed on time. If your return is filed with IRS e-file , you will re- ceive an acknowledgment that your return was received and accepted. If you owe tax, you can e-file and pay electronically. The IRS has pro- cessed more than one billion e-filed returns Page 10 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 11 --- safely and securely. Using e-file doesn't affect your chances of an IRS examination of your re- turn. Requirements for an electronic return. The requirements for signing an electronic return will be different depending on whether you use tax software or a tax practitioner. If you are filing electronically using Direct File, you should fol- low the instructions provided to you by Direct File for how to sign your electronic return. Oth- erwise, to file your return electronically, you must sign the return electronically using a per- sonal identification number (PIN) and provide the information described below. If you are filing online using software, you must use a Self -Se- lect PIN. If you are filing electronically using a tax practitioner, you can use a Self -Select PIN or a Practitioner PIN. If we issued you an identity protection per- sonal identification number (IP PIN) (as described in more detail next), all six digits of your IP PIN must appear in the IP PIN spaces provided next to the space for your occupation for your electronic signature to be complete. Failure to include an issued IP PIN on the elec- tronic return will result in an invalid signature and a rejected return. If you are filing a joint re- turn and both taxpayers were issued IP PINs, enter both IP PINs in the spaces provided. Self- Select PIN. The Self -Select PIN method allows you to create your own PIN. If you are married filing jointly, you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN and enter these PINs as your electronic signatures. A PIN is any combination of five digits you choose except five zeros. If you use a PIN, there is nothing to sign and nothing to mail —not even your Forms W-2. Y our electronic return signed with a Self -Se- lect PIN is considered a validly signed return only when it includes your PIN; last name; date of birth; IP PIN, if applicable; and your adjusted gross income (AGI) from your originally filed 2023 federal income tax return, if applicable. If you're filing jointly, your electronic return must also include your spouse's PIN; last name; date of birth; IP PIN, if applicable; and AGI, if appli- cable, in order to be considered validly signed. (Y ou, and your spouse if filing jointly, may each use your own prior -year pin to verify your iden- tity if you filed electronically last year. If you use your prior- year PIN or enter your IP PIN, you are not required to enter your prior -year AGI. The prior- year PIN is the five -digit PIN you used to electronically sign your 2023 return.) If you need your AGI from your originally filed 2023 federal income tax return, and you don’t have your 2023 income tax return, you can access your transcript through your online ac- count at IRS.gov/Account . Y ou can also go to IRS.gov/T ranscript or call the IRS at 800-908- 9946 to get a free transcript of your re- turn. Don't use your AGI from an amended re- turn (Form 1040 -X) or a math error correction made by the IRS. AGI is the amount shown on your 2023 Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 11. For more information, go to IRS.gov/Efile . Y ou can’t use the Self -Select PIN method if you are a first -time filer under age 16 at the end of 2024. Practitioner PIN. The Practitioner PIN method allows you to authorize your tax practitioner to enter or generate your PIN. Y our electronic re- turn is considered a validly signed return only when it includes your PIN; last name; date of birth; and IP PIN, if applicable. If you’re filing jointly, your electronic return must also include your spouse’s PIN; last name; date of birth; and IP PIN, if applicable, in order to be considered a validly signed return. The practitioner can pro- vide you with details. Form 8453. Y ou must send in a paper Form 8453 if you have to attach certain forms or other documents that can’t be electronically filed. See Form 8453. Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). If the IRS gave you an IP PIN, enter it in the spaces provi- ded on your tax form. If the IRS hasn’t given you this type of number, leave these spaces blank. For more information, see the Instructions for Form 1040. All taxpayers are now eligible for an IP PIN. For more information, see Pub. 5477. T o apply for an IP PIN, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN and use the Get an IP PIN tool. Power of attorney. If an agent is signing your return for you, a power of attorney (POA) must be filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 and file it using that form's instructions. See Signatures , later, for more information on POAs. State returns. In most states, you can file an electronic state return simultaneously with your federal return. For more information, check with your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro- fessional, or the IRS website at IRS.gov/efile . Refunds. Y ou can have a refund check mailed to you, or you can have your refund deposited directly to your checking or savings account or split among two or three accounts. With e-file , CAUTION! TIP2024 Filing Requirements for Dependents See chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent . If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you must file a return. (See T able 1 -3 for other situations when you must file.) In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a trust. Earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in chapter 8.) Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income. Single dependents —Were you either age 65 or older or blind? No. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply. •Y our unearned income was more than $1,300. •Y our earned income was more than $14,600. •Y our gross income was more than the larger of: •$1,300 or •Y our earned income (up to $14,150) plus $450. Yes. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply. •Y our unearned income was more than $3,250 ($5,200 if 65 or older and blind). •Y our earned income was more than $16,550 ($18,500 if 65 or older and blind). •Y our gross income was more than the larger of: •$3,250 ($5,200 if 65 or older and blind), or •Y our earned income (up to $14,150) plus $2,400 ($4,350 if 65 or older and blind). Married dependents —Were you either age 65 or older or blind? No. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply. •Y our unearned income was more than $1,300. •Y our earned income was more than $14,600. •Y our gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions. •Y our gross income was more than the larger of: •$1,300, or •Y our earned income (up to $14,150) plus $450. Yes. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply. •Y our unearned income was more than $2,850 ($4,400 if 65 or older and blind). •Y our earned income was more than $16,150 ($17,700 if 65 or older and blind). •Y our gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions. •Y our gross income was more than the larger of: •$2,850 ($4,400 if 65 or older and blind), or •Y our earned income (up to $14,150) plus $2,000 ($3,550 if 65 or older and blind).T able 1-2.Page 11 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 9 --- Page 12 --- your refund will be issued faster than if you filed on paper. Y ou may not get all of your refund if you owe certain past -due amounts, such as federal tax, state income tax, state unemployment compen- sation debts, child support, spousal support, or certain other federal nontax debts, such as stu- dent loans. See Offset against debts under Re- funds , later. Refund inquiries. Information about your re- turn will generally be available within 24 hours after the IRS receives your e -filed return. See Refund Information , later. Amount you owe. T o avoid late -payment pen- alties and interest, pay your taxes in full by April 15, 2025 (for most people). See How T o Pay , later, for information on how to pay the amount you owe. Using Your Personal Computer Y ou can file your tax return in a fast, easy, and convenient way using your personal computer. A computer with In- ternet access and tax preparation software are all you need. Best of all, you can e-file from the comfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. IRS- approved tax preparation software is available online and in retail stores. For informa- tion, visit IRS.gov/efile . Through Employers and Financial Institutions Some businesses offer free e-file to their em- ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as an employee, member, or customer benefit. Free Help With Your Return The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) program offers free tax help to people who gen- erally have less than $67,000 in adjusted gross income, persons with disabilities, and limi- ted-English- speaking taxpayers who need help preparing their own tax returns. The T ax Coun- seling for the Elderly (TCE) program offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volunteers specialize in answering questions about pen- sions and retirement -related issues unique to seniors. Y ou can go to IRS.gov to see your options for preparing and filing your return, which in- clude the following. •Direct File . Go to IRS.gov/DirectFile . See if you qualify to file your federal tax return for free directly with the IRS. •Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile . See if you qualify to use brand-name software to prepare and e-file your federal tax return for free. •VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA , download the free IRS2Go app, or call 800-906-9887 to T able 1-4. Free Ways To e-file Use Direct File to file your federal tax return online, securely with the IRS. •T axpayers with relatively simple returns in participating states are eligible for Direct File. •Go to IRS.gov/DirectFile for information about additional states that have joined, and the new tax situations Direct File added for the 2024 tax year. Use Free File for free tax software and free e-file . •IRS partners offer name-brand products for free. •Many taxpayers are eligible for Free File software. •Everyone is eligible for Free File Fillable Forms, an electronic version of IRS paper forms. •Free File software and Free File Fillable Forms are available only at IRS.gov/FreeFile . Use VITA/TCE for free tax help from volunteers and free e-file . •Volunteers prepare your return and e-file it for free. •Some sites also offer do-it-yourself software. •Y ou are eligible based either on your income or age. •Sites are located nationwide. Find one near you by visiting IRS.gov/VITA .T able 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2024 Return Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply for 2024. 1. Y ou owe any special taxes, including any of the following (see the instructions for Schedule 2 (Form 1040)). a.Alternative minimum tax. b.Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. c.Household employment taxes. d.Social security and Medicare tax on tips you didn't report to your employer or on wages you received from an employer who didn't withhold these taxes. e.Uncollected social security and Medicare or RRTA tax on tips you reported to your employer or on group-term life insurance and additional taxes on health savings accounts. f.Recapture taxes. 2. Y ou (or your spouse, if filing jointly) received health savings account, Archer MSA, or Medicare Advantage MSA distributions. 3. Y ou had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. 4. Y ou had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes. 5. Advance payments of the premium tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent who enrolled in coverage through the Marketplace. Y ou or whoever enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1095-A showing the amount of the advance payments. 6. Y ou are required to include amounts in income under section 965 or you have a net tax liability under section 965 that you are paying in installments under section 965(h) or deferred by making an election under section 965(i). 7. Y ou purchased a new or used clean vehicle from a registered dealer and reduced the amount you paid at the time of sale by transferring the credit to the dealer. See Form 8936 and Schedule A (Form 8936).Page 12 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 13 --- find the nearest VITA location for free tax return preparation. •TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE , download the free IRS2Go app, or call 888-227-7669 to find the nearest TCE location for free tax return preparation. Using a Tax Professional Many tax professionals electronically file tax re- turns for their clients. Y ou may personally enter your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-file Sig- nature Authorization, to authorize the tax profes- sional to enter your PIN on your return. Note. T ax professionals may charge a fee for IRS e-file . Fees can vary depending on the professional and the specific services rendered. When Do I Have To File? April 15, 2025, is the due date for filing your 2024 income tax return if you use the calendar year. For a quick view of due dates for filing a return with or without an extension of time to file (discussed later), see T able 1 -5. If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the last day of any month except December, or a 52-53- week year), your income tax return is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close of your fiscal year. When the due date for doing any act for tax purposes— filing a return, paying taxes, etc.— falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi- day, the due date is delayed until the next busi- ness day. Filing paper returns on time. Y our paper re- turn is filed on time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properly addressed, has enough post- age, and is postmarked by the due date. If you send your return by registered mail, the date of the registration is the postmark date. The regis- tration is evidence that the return was delivered. If you send a return by certified mail and have your receipt postmarked by a postal employee, the date on the receipt is the postmark date. The postmarked certified mail receipt is evi- dence that the return was delivered. Private delivery services. If you choose to mail your return, you can use certain private de- livery services designated by the IRS to meet the “timely mailing treated as timely filing/ paying” rule for tax returns and payments. These private delivery services include only the following. •UPS Next Day Air Early A.M., UPS Next Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS 2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPS Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World- wide Express. •FedEx First Overnight, FedEx Priority Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight, Fe- dEx 2 Day, FedEx International Next Flight Out, FedEx International Priority, FedEx In- ternational First, and FedEx International Economy. •DHL Express 9:00, DHL Express 10:30, DHL Express 12:00, DHL Express Worldwide, DHL Express Envelope, DHL Import Express 10:30, DHL Import Express 12:00, and DHL Import Express World- wide. T o check for any updates to the list of desig- nated private delivery services, go to IRS.gov/ PDS . For the IRS mailing addresses to use if you’re using a private delivery service, go to IRS.gov/PDSStreetAddresses . The private delivery service can tell you how to get written proof of the mailing date. Only the U.S. Postal Service can de- liver to P .O. boxes. Y ou can’t use a pri- vate delivery service to make tax pay- ments required to be sent to a P .O. box. Filing electronic returns on time. If you use IRS e-file , your return is considered filed on time if the authorized electronic return transmitter postmarks the transmission by the due date. An authorized electronic return transmitter is a par- ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmits electronic tax return information directly to the IRS. The electronic postmark is a record of when the authorized electronic return transmitter re- ceived the transmission of your electronically filed return on its host system. The date and time in your time zone controls whether your electronically filed return is timely. Filing late. If you don't file your return by the due date, you may have to pay a failure -to-file penalty and interest. For more information, see Penalties , later. Also see Interest under Amount Y ou Owe , later. If you were due a refund but you didn't file a return, you must generally file within 3 years from the date the return was due (including ex- tensions) to get that refund. Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresident alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income tax withholding, your 2024 U.S. income tax re- turn (Form 1040-NR) is due by: •April 15, 2025, if you use a calendar year; or •The 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal year. If you don't earn wages subject to U.S. in- come tax withholding, your return is due by: •June 16, 2025, if you use a calendar year; or •The 15th day of the 6th month after the end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal year. See Pub. 519 for more filing information. Filing for a decedent. If you must file a final income tax return for a taxpayer who died dur- ing the year (a decedent), the return is due by CAUTION!the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of the decedent's normal tax year. See Pub. 559. Extensions of Time To File Y ou may be able to get an extension of time to file your return. There are three types of situa- tions where you may qualify for an extension. •Automatic extensions. •Y ou are outside the United States. •Y ou are serving in a combat zone. Automatic Extension If you can’t file your 2024 return by the due date, you may be able to get an automatic 6 -month extension of time to file. Example. If your return is due on April 15, 2025, you will have until October 15, 2025, to file. If you don't pay the tax due by the regu- lar due date (April 15 for most taxpay- ers), you will owe interest. Y ou may also be charged penalties, discussed later. How to get the automatic extension. Y ou can get the automatic extension by: 1.Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or 2.Filing a paper form. E-file options. There are two ways you can use e-file to get an extension of time to file. Complete Form 4868 to use as a worksheet. If you think you may owe tax when you file your return, use Part II of the form to estimate your balance due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, don't send a paper Form 4868. E-file using your personal computer or a tax professional. Y ou can use a tax software package with your personal computer or a tax professional to file Form 4868 electronically. Free File and Free File Fillable Forms, both available at IRS.gov, allow you to prepare and e-file Form 4868 for free. Y ou will need to pro- vide certain information from your 2023 tax re- turn. If you wish to make a payment by direct transfer from your bank account, see Pay online under How T o Pay , later, in this chapter. E-file and pay by credit or debit card or by direct transfer from your bank account. Y ou can get an extension by paying part or all of your estimate of tax due by using a credit or debit card or by direct transfer from your bank account. Y ou can do this by phone or over the Internet. Y ou don't file Form 4868. See Pay on- line under How T o Pay , later, in this chapter. CAUTION!When To File Your 2024 Return For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year basis. For Most TaxpayersFor Certain Taxpayers Outside the United States No extension requested April 15, 2025 June 16, 2025 Automatic extension October 15, 2025 October 15, 2025T able 1-5.Page 13 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 11 --- Page 14 --- Filing a paper Form 4868. Y ou can get an ex- tension of time to file by filing a paper Form 4868. If you are a fiscal year taxpayer, you must file a paper Form 4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form instructions. If you want to make a payment with the form, make your check or money order payable to “United States T reasury.” Write your SSN, day- time phone number, and “2024 Form 4868” on your check or money order. When to file. Y ou must request the automatic extension by the due date for your return. Y ou can file your return any time before the 6 -month extension period ends. When you file your return. Enter any pay- ment you made related to the extension of time to file on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 10. Individuals Outside the United States Y ou are allowed an automatic 2 -month exten- sion, without filing Form 4868 (until June 16, 2025, if you use the calendar year), to file your 2024 return and pay any federal income tax due if: 1.Y ou are a U.S. citizen or resident; and 2.On the due date of your return: a.Y ou are living outside the United States and Puerto Rico, and your main place of business or post of duty is outside the United States and Pu- erto Rico; or b.Y ou are in military or naval service on duty outside the United States and Puerto Rico. However, if you pay the tax due after the reg- ular due date (April 15 for most taxpayers), in- terest will be charged from that date until the date the tax is paid. If you served in a combat zone or qualified hazardous duty area, you may be eligible for a longer extension of time to file. See Individuals Serving in Combat Zone , later, for special rules that apply to you. Married taxpayers. If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to qualify for this automatic extension. If you and your spouse file separate returns, the automatic extension applies only to the spouse who qualifies. How to get the extension. T o use this auto- matic extension, you must attach a statement to your return explaining what situation qualified you for the extension. (See the situations listed under (2), earlier.) Extensions beyond 2 months. If you can’t file your return within the automatic 2 -month exten- sion period, you may be able to get an addi- tional 4 -month extension, for a total of 6 months. File Form 4868 and check the box on line 8. No further extension. An extension of more than 6 months will generally not be granted. However, if you are outside the United States and meet certain tests, you may be granted a longer extension. For more information, see When T o File and Pay in Pub. 54.Individuals Serving in Combat Zone The deadline for filing your tax return, paying any tax you may owe, and filing a claim for re- fund is automatically extended if you serve in a combat zone. This applies to members of the Armed Forces, as well as merchant marines serving aboard vessels under the operational control of the Department of Defense, Red Cross personnel, accredited correspondents, and civilians under the direction of the Armed Forces in support of the Armed Forces. Combat zone. A combat zone is any area the President of the United States designates by executive order as an area in which the U.S. Armed Forces are engaging or have engaged in combat. An area usually becomes a combat zone and ceases to be a combat zone on the dates the President designates by executive or- der. For purposes of the automatic extension, the term “combat zone” includes the following areas. 1.The Arabian peninsula area, effective Jan- uary 17, 1991. 2.The Kosovo area, effective March 24, 1999. 3.The Afghanistan area, effective Septem- ber 19, 2001. See Pub. 3 for more detailed information on the locations comprising each combat zone. Pub. 3 also has information about other tax ben- efits available to military personnel serving in a combat zone. Extension period. The deadline for filing your return, paying any tax due, filing a claim for re- fund, and taking other actions with the IRS is extended in two steps. First, your deadline is extended for 180 days after the later of: 1.The last day you are in a combat zone or the last day the area qualifies as a combat zone, or 2.The last day of any continuous qualified hospitalization (defined later) for injury from service in the combat zone. Second, in addition to the 180 days, your deadline is also extended by the number of days you had left to take action with the IRS when you entered the combat zone. For exam- ple, you have 31/2 months (January 1–April 15) to file your tax return. Any days left in this period when you entered the combat zone (or the en- tire 31/2 months if you entered it before the be- ginning of the year) are added to the 180 days. See How Much Extra Time Do These Exten- sions Give Me? in Pub. 3 for more information. The rules on the extension for filing your re- turn also apply when you are deployed outside the United States (away from your permanent duty station) while participating in a designated contingency operation. Qualified hospitalization. The hospitalization must be the result of an injury received while serving in a combat zone or a contingency op- eration. Qualified hospitalization means: •Any hospitalization outside the United States, and•Up to 5 years of hospitalization in the Uni- ted States. See Pub. 3 for more information on qualified hospitalizations. How Do I Prepare My Return? This section explains how to get ready to fill in your tax return and when to report your income and expenses. It also explains how to complete certain sections of the form. Y ou may find T a- ble 1 -6 helpful when you prepare your paper re- turn. Six Steps for Preparing Your Paper Return 1—Get your records together for income and expenses. 2—Get the forms, schedules, and publications you need. 3—Fill in your return. 4—Check your return to make sure it is correct. 5—Sign and date your return. 6—Attach all required forms and schedules. Electronic returns. For information you may find useful in preparing an electronic return, see Why Should I File Electronically , earlier. Substitute tax forms. Y ou can’t use your own version of a tax form unless it meets the require- ments explained in Pub. 1167. Form W -2. If you were an employee, you should receive Form W -2 from your employer. Y ou will need the information from this form to prepare your return. See Form W -2 under Credit for Withholding and Estimated T ax for 2024 in chapter 4. Y our employer is required to provide or send Form W -2 to you no later than January 31, 2025. If it is mailed, you should allow adequate time to receive it before contacting your em- ployer. If you still don't get the form by early February, the IRS can help you by requesting the form from your employer. When you request IRS help, be prepared to provide the following information. •Y our name, address (including ZIP code), and phone number. •Y our SSN. •Y our dates of employment. •Y our employer's name, address (including ZIP code), and phone number. Form 1099. If you received certain types of in- come, you may receive a Form 1099. For exam- ple, if you received taxable interest of $10 or more, the payer is required to provide or send Form 1099 to you no later than January 31, 2025 (or by February 18, 2025, if furnished by a broker). If it is mailed, you should allow ade- quate time to receive it before contacting the T able 1-6.Page 14 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 15 --- payer. If you still don't get the form by February 18 (or by March 3, 2025, if furnished by a broker), call the IRS for help. When Do I Report My Income and Expenses? Y ou must figure your taxable income on the ba- sis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual ac- counting period used for keeping records and reporting income and expenses. Y ou must ac- count for your income and expenses in a way that clearly shows your taxable income. The way you do this is called an accounting method. This section explains which accounting periods and methods you can use. Accounting Periods Most individual tax returns cover a calendar year— the 12 months from January 1 through December 31. If you don't use a calendar year, your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regular fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the last day of any month except December. A 52-53- week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53 weeks and always ends on the same day of the week. Y ou choose your accounting period (tax year) when you file your first income tax return. It can’t be longer than 12 months. More information. For more information on accounting periods, including how to change your accounting period, see Pub. 538. Accounting Methods Y our accounting method is the way you account for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers use either the cash method or an accrual method. Y ou choose a method when you file your first income tax return. If you want to change your accounting method after that, you must generally get IRS approval. Use Form 3115 to request an accounting method change. Cash method. If you use this method, report all items of income in the year in which you ac- tually or constructively receive them. Generally, you deduct all expenses in the year you actually pay them. This is the method most individual taxpayers use. Constructive receipt. Generally, you con- structively receive income when it is credited to your account or set apart in any way that makes it available to you. Y ou don't need to have physi- cal possession of it. For example, interest credi- ted to your bank account on December 31, 2024, is taxable income to you in 2024 if you could have withdrawn it in 2024 (even if the amount isn't entered in your records or with- drawn until 2025). Garnished wages. If your employer uses your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages are attached or garnished, the full amount is constructively received by you. Y ou must in- clude these wages in income for the year you would have received them. Debts paid for you. If another person can- cels or pays your debts (but not as a gift or loan), you have constructively received the amount and must generally include it in your gross income for the year. See Canceled Debts in chapter 8 for more information. Payment to third party. If a third party is paid income from property you own, you have constructively received the income. It is the same as if you had actually received the income and paid it to the third party. Payment to an agent. Income an agent re- ceives for you is income you constructively re- ceived in the year the agent receives it. If you in- dicate in a contract that your income is to be paid to another person, you must include the amount in your gross income when the other person receives it. Check received or available. A valid check that was made available to you before the end of the tax year is constructively received by you in that year. A check that was “made available to you” includes a check you have already re- ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in- cludes, for example, your last paycheck of the year that your employer made available for you to pick up at the office before the end of the year. It is constructively received by you in that year whether or not you pick it up before the end of the year or wait to receive it by mail after the end of the year. No constructive receipt. There may be facts to show that you didn't constructively re- ceive income. Example. Lennon, a teacher, agreed to the school board's condition that, in Lennon’s ab- sence, Lennon would receive only the differ- ence between Lennon’s regular salary and the salary of a substitute teacher hired by the school board. Therefore, Lennon didn't con- structively receive the amount by which Len- non’s salary was reduced to pay the substitute teacher. Accrual method. If you use an accrual method, you generally report income when you earn it, rather than when you receive it. Y ou generally deduct your expenses when you incur them, rather than when you pay them. Income paid in advance. An advance pay- ment of income is generally included in gross income in the year you receive it. Y our method of accounting doesn't matter as long as the in- come is available to you. An advance payment may include rent or interest you receive in ad- vance and pay for services you will perform later. A limited deferral until the next tax year may be allowed for certain advance payments. See Pub. 538 for specific information. Additional information. For more information on accounting methods, including how to change your accounting method, see Pub. 538. Social Security Number (SSN) Y ou must enter your SSN on your return. If you are married, enter the SSNs for both you and your spouse, whether you file jointly or sepa- rately. If you are filing a joint return, include the SSNs in the same order as the names. Use this same order in submitting other forms and docu- ments to the IRS. If you, or your spouse if filing jointly, don't have an SSN (or ITIN) issued on or before the due date of your 2024 re- turn (including extensions), you can't claim cer- tain tax benefits on your original or an amended 2024 return. Once you are issued an SSN, use it to file your tax return. Use your SSN to file your tax re- turn even if your SSN does not authorize em- ployment or if you have been issued an SSN that authorizes employment and you lose your employment authorization. An ITIN will not be issued to you once you have been issued an SSN. If you received your SSN after previously using an ITIN, stop using your ITIN. Use your SSN instead. Check that both the name and SSN on your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, W -2, and 1099 agree with your social security card. If they don't, cer- tain deductions and credits on your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR may be reduced or disallowed and you may not receive credit for your social secur- ity earnings. If your Form W -2 shows an incor- rect SSN or name, notify your employer or the form- issuing agent as soon as possible to make sure your earnings are credited to your social security record. If the name or SSN on your so- cial security card is incorrect, call the Social Se- curity Administration (SSA) at 800-772-1213. Name change. If you changed your name be- cause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re- port the change to your local SSA office before filing your return. This prevents delays in pro- cessing your return and issuing refunds. It also safeguards your future social security benefits. Dependent's SSN. Y ou must provide the SSN of each dependent you claim, regardless of the dependent's age. This requirement applies to all dependents (not just your children) claimed on your tax return. Y our child must have an SSN valid for employment issued before the due date of your 2024 return (including ex- tensions) to be considered a qualifying child for certain tax benefits on your original or amended 2024 return. See chapter 14 . Exception. If your child was born and died in 2024 and didn't have an SSN, enter “DIED” in column (2) of the Dependents section of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR and include a copy of the child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos- pital records. The document must show that the child was born alive. No SSN. File Form SS -5, Application for a So- cial Security Card, with your local SSA office to get an SSN for yourself or your dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN. If you or your dependent isn't eligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) , later. If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you must show proof of age, identity, and citizenship or alien status with your Form SS -5. If you are 12 or older and have never been assigned an SSN, you must appear in person with this proof at an SSA office. Form SS -5 is available at any SSA office, on the Internet at SSA.gov/forms/ss-5.pdf , or by CAUTION! CAUTION!Page 15 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 13 --- Page 16 --- calling 800-772- 1213. If you have any questions about which documents you can use as proof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your SSA office. If your dependent doesn't have an SSN by the time your return is due, you may want to ask for an extension of time to file, as explained ear- lier under When Do I Have T o File . If you don't provide a required SSN or if you provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in- creased and any refund may be reduced. Adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and can’t get an SSN for the child until the adoption is fi- nal, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of an SSN. File Form W -7A, Application for T axpayer Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop- tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the fol- lowing are true. •Y ou have a child living with you who was placed in your home for legal adoption. •Y ou can’t get the child's existing SSN even though you have made a reasonable at- tempt to get it from the birth parents, the placement agency, and other persons. •Y ou can’t get an SSN for the child from the SSA because, for example, the adoption isn't final. •Y ou are eligible to claim the child as a de- pendent on your tax return. After the adoption is final, you must apply for an SSN for the child. Y ou can’t continue using the ATIN. See Form W-7A for more information. Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is a nonresident alien, your spouse must have either an SSN or an ITIN if: •Y ou file a joint return, or •Y our spouse is filing a separate return. If your spouse isn't eligible for an SSN, see the following discussion on ITINs . Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident alien and you don't have and aren’t eligible to get an SSN. This also applies to an alien spouse or dependent. T o ap- ply for an ITIN, file Form W -7 with the IRS. It usually takes about 7 weeks to get an ITIN. En- ter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an SSN is requested. Make sure your ITIN hasn’t expired. See In- dividual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) renewal , earlier, for more information on expira- tion and renewal of ITINs. Y ou can also find more information at IRS.gov/ITIN . If you are applying for an ITIN for your- self, your spouse, or a dependent in or- der to file your tax return, attach your completed tax return to your Form W -7. See the Form W-7 instructions for how and where to file. Y ou can’t e-file a return using an ITIN in the calendar year the ITIN is issued; however, you can e-file returns in the following years. TIP CAUTION!ITIN for tax use only. An ITIN is for federal tax use only. It doesn't entitle you to social se- curity benefits or change your employment or immigration status under U.S. law. Penalty for not providing social security number. If you don't include your SSN or the SSN of your spouse or dependent as required, you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus- sion on Penalties , later, for more information. SSN on correspondence. If you write to the IRS about your tax account, be sure to include your SSN (and the name and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre- spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden- tify your account, this helps the IRS respond to your correspondence promptly. Presidential Election Campaign Fund This fund helps pay for Presidential election campaigns. The fund also helps pay for pedia- tric medical research. If you want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. If you are filing a joint return, your spouse can also have $3 go to the fund. If you check the box, your tax or refund won't change. Computations The following information may be useful in mak- ing the return easier to complete. Rounding off dollars. Y ou can round off cents to whole dollars on your return and schedules. If you do round to whole dollars, you must round all amounts. T o round, drop amounts under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 to 99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39 be- comes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3. If you have to add two or more amounts to figure the amount to enter on a line, include cents when adding the amounts and round off only the total. If you are entering amounts that include cents, make sure to include the decimal point. There is no cents column on Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter the smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enter that amount. Negative amounts. If you file a paper return and you need to enter a negative amount, put the amount in parentheses rather than using a minus sign. T o combine positive and negative amounts, add all the positive amounts together and then subtract the negative amounts. Attachments Depending on the form you file and the items re- ported on your return, you may have to com- plete additional schedules and forms and attach them to your paper return. Y ou may be able to file a paperless re- turn using IRS e-file . There's nothing to attach or mail, not even your Forms W-2. See Why Should I File Electronically , ear- lier. TIPForm W -2. Form W -2 is a statement from your employer of wages and other compensation paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay. Y ou should have a Form W -2 from each em- ployer. If you file a paper return, be sure to at- tach a copy of Form W -2 in the place indicated on your return. For more information, see Form W-2 in chapter 4. Form 1099 -R. If you received a Form 1099 -R showing federal income tax withheld, and you file a paper return, attach a copy of that form in the place indicated on your return. Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you file a paper re- turn, attach any forms and schedules behind Form 1040 or 1040 -SR in order of the “Attach- ment Sequence No.” shown in the upper right corner of the form or schedule. Then, arrange all other statements or attachments in the same order as the forms and schedules they relate to and attach them last. Don't attach items unless required to do so. Third Party Designee If you want to allow your preparer, a friend, a family member, or any other person you choose to discuss your 2024 tax return with the IRS, check the “Y es” box in the “Third Party Desig- nee” area of your return. Also, enter the design- ee's name, phone number, and any five digits the designee chooses as their personal identifi- cation number (PIN). If you check the “Y es” box, you, and your spouse if filing a joint return, are authorizing the IRS to call the designee to answer any ques- tions that arise during the processing of your re- turn. Y ou are also authorizing the designee to: •Give information that is missing from your return to the IRS; •Call the IRS for information about the pro- cessing of your return or the status of your refund or payments; •Receive copies of notices or transcripts re- lated to your return, upon request; and •Respond to certain IRS notices about math errors, offsets (see Refunds , later), and re- turn preparation. Y ou aren't authorizing the designee to re- ceive any refund check, bind you to anything (including any additional tax liability), or other- wise represent you before the IRS. If you want to expand the designee's authorization, see Pub. 947. The authorization will automatically end no later than the due date (without any extensions) for filing your 2025 tax return. This is April 15, 2026, for most people. See your form instructions for more informa- tion. Signatures Y ou must sign and date your return. If you file a joint return, both you and your spouse must sign the return, even if only one of you had income.Page 16 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 17 --- If you file a joint return, both spouses are generally liable for the tax, and the entire tax liability may be assessed against either spouse. See chapter 2 . Y our return isn't considered a valid return un- less you sign it in accordance with the require- ments in the instructions for your return. Y ou must handwrite your signature on your return if you file it on paper. Digital, electronic, or typed- font signatures are not valid signatures for Forms 1040 or 1040-SR filed on paper. If you electronically file your return, you can use an electronic signature to sign your return in accordance with the requirements contained in the instructions for your return. Failure to sign your return in accordance with these requirements may prevent you from obtaining a refund. Enter your occupation. If you file a joint re- turn, enter both your occupation and your spou- se's occupation. When someone can sign for you. Y ou can appoint an agent to sign your return if you are: 1.Unable to sign the return because of dis- ease or injury, 2.Absent from the United States for a contin- uous period of at least 60 days before the due date for filing your return, or 3.Given permission to do so by the IRS of- fice in your area. Power of attorney. A return signed by an agent in any of these cases must have a power of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the agent to sign for you. Y ou can use a POA that states that the agent is granted authority to sign the return, or you can use Form 2848. Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is granted authority to sign the return. Court- appointed conservator, guardian, or other fiduciary. If you are a court -appointed conservator, guardian, or other fiduciary for a mentally or physically incompetent individual who has to file a tax return, sign your name for the individual. File Form 56. Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is mentally competent but physically unable to sign the re- turn or POA, a valid “signature” is defined under state law. It can be anything that clearly indi- cates the taxpayer's intent to sign. For example, the taxpayer's “X” with the signatures of two wit- nesses might be considered a valid signature under a state's law. Spouse unable to sign. If your spouse is un- able to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint return in chapter 2. Child's return. If a child has to file a tax return but can’t sign the return, the child's parent, guardian, or another legally responsible person must sign the child's name, followed by the words “By (your signature), parent for minor child.” Paid Preparer Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist in preparing, or review your tax return must sign it CAUTION!and fill in the other blanks, including their Pre- parer T ax Identification Number (PTIN), in the paid preparer's area of your return. Many preparers are required to e-file the tax returns they prepare. They sign these e-filed re- turns using their tax preparation software. How- ever, you can choose to have your return com- pleted on paper if you prefer. In that case, the paid preparer can sign the paper return man- ually or use a rubber stamp or mechanical de- vice. The preparer is personally responsible for affixing their signature to the return. If the preparer is self -employed (that is, not employed by any person or business to prepare the return), the preparer should check the self- employed box in the “Paid Preparer Use Only” space on the return. The preparer must give you a copy of your return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS. If you prepare your own return, leave this area blank. If another person prepares your re- turn and doesn't charge you, that person shouldn't sign your return. If you have questions about whether a pre- parer must sign your return, contact any IRS of- fice. Refunds When you complete your return, you will deter- mine if you paid more income tax than you owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount you overpaid or you can choose to apply all or part of the overpayment to your next year's (2025) estimated tax. If you choose to have a 2024 overpay- ment applied to your 2025 estimated tax, you can’t change your mind and have any of it refunded to you after the due date (without extensions) of your 2024 return. Follow the Instructions for Form 1040 to complete the entries to claim your refund and/or to apply your overpayment to your 2025 estima- ted tax. If your refund for 2024 is large, you may want to decrease the amount of in- come tax withheld from your pay in 2025. See chapter 4 for more information. Instead of getting a pa- per check, you may be able to have your refund deposited directly into your checking, savings, health savings, broker- age, or other similar account, including an indi- vidual retirement arrangement (IRA). Follow the Instructions for Form 1040 to request direct de- posit. If the direct deposit can’t be done, the IRS will send a check instead. Don't request a deposit of any part of your refund to an account that isn't in your name. Don't allow your tax preparer to deposit any part of your refund into the preparer’s account. The number of direct deposits to a single account or prepaid debit card is limited to three refunds a year. After this limit is exceeded, paper checks will be sent instead. Learn more at IRS.gov/ DepositLimit . IRA. Y ou can have your refund (or part of it) di- rectly deposited to a traditional IRA or Roth IRA, but not a SIMPLE IRA. Y ou must establish the CAUTION! TIP Simple. Safe. Secure.DIRECT DEPOSITIRA at a bank or financial institution before you request direct deposit. Split refunds. If you choose direct deposit, you may be able to split the refund and have it deposited into more than one account. Com- plete Form 8888 and attach it to your return. Overpayment less than one dollar. If your overpayment is less than $1, you won't get a re- fund unless you ask for it in writing. Cashing your refund check. Cash your tax refund check soon after you receive it. Checks expire the last business day of the 12th month of issue. If your check has expired, you can apply to the IRS to have it reissued. Refund more or less than expected. If you receive a check for a refund you aren’t entitled to, or for an overpayment that should have been credited to estimated tax, don't cash the check. Call the IRS. If you receive a check for more than the re- fund you claimed, don't cash the check until you receive a notice explaining the difference. If your refund check is for less than you claimed, it should be accompanied by a notice explaining the difference. Cashing the check doesn't stop you from claiming an additional amount of refund. If you didn't receive a notice and you have any questions about the amount of your refund, you should wait 2 weeks. If you still haven’t re- ceived a notice, call the IRS. Offset against debts. If you are due a refund but haven’t paid certain amounts you owe, all or part of your refund may be used to pay all or part of the past -due amount. This includes past-due federal income tax, other federal debts (such as student loans), state income tax, child and spousal support payments, and state un- employment compensation debt. Y ou will be no- tified if the refund you claimed has been offset against your debts. Joint return and injured spouse. When a joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a past- due amount, the other spouse can be con- sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse should file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca- tion, if both of the following apply and the spouse wants a refund of their share of the overpayment shown on the joint return. 1.Y ou aren’t legally obligated to pay the past-due amount. 2.Y ou made and reported tax payments (such as federal income tax withheld from your wages or estimated tax payments), or claimed a refundable tax credit (see the credits listed under Who Should File , ear- lier). Note. If the injured spouse's residence was in a community property state at any time during the tax year, special rules may apply. See the Instructions for Form 8379. If you haven’t filed your joint return and you know that your joint refund will be offset, file Form 8379 with your return. Y ou should receive your refund within 14 weeks from the date the paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the date the return is filed electronically.Page 17 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 15 --- Page 18 --- If you filed your joint return and your joint re- fund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to re- ceive your refund. Don't attach the previously filed tax return, but do include copies of all Forms W-2 and W- 2G for both spouses and any Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. The processing of Form 8379 may be delayed if these forms aren’t attached, or if the form is in- complete when filed. A separate Form 8379 must be filed for each tax year to be considered. An injured spouse claim is different from an innocent spouse relief request. An injured spouse uses Form 8379 to request the division of the tax overpayment at- tributed to each spouse. An innocent spouse uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint liability for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for items of the other spouse (or former spouse) that were incorrectly reported on the joint return. For information on innocent spouses, see Relief from joint responsibility under Filing a Joint Re- turn in chapter 2. Amount You Owe When you complete your return, you will deter- mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that you owe. If you owe additional tax, you should pay it with your return. Y ou don't have to pay if the amount you owe is under $1. If the IRS figures your tax for you, you will re- ceive a bill for any tax that is due. Y ou should pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of your return, if later). See T ax Figured by IRS in chapter 13. If you don't pay your tax when due, you may have to pay a failure -to-pay pen- alty. See Penalties , later. For more in- formation about your balance due, see Pub. 594. If the amount you owe for 2024 is large, you may want to increase the amount of income tax withheld from your pay or make estimated tax payments for 2025. See chapter 4 for more information. How To Pay Y ou can pay online, by phone, by mobile device, in cash, or by check or money order. Don't in- clude any estimated tax payment for 2025 in this payment. Instead, make the estimated tax payment separately. Bad check or payment. The penalty for writ- ing a bad check to the IRS is $25 or 2% of the check, whichever is more. This penalty also ap- plies to other forms of payment if the IRS doesn't receive the funds. Pay online. Paying online is convenient and secure and helps make sure we get your pay- ments on time. Y ou can pay online with a direct transfer from your bank account using IRS Direct Pay or CAUTION! TIP CAUTION! TIPthe Electronic Federal T ax Payment System (EFTPS), or by debit or credit card. T o pay your taxes online or for more informa- tion, go to IRS.gov/Payments . Pay by phone. Paying by phone is another safe and secure method of paying online. Use one of the following methods. •EFTPS. •Debit or credit card. T o get more information about EFTPS or to enroll in EFTPS, visit EFTPS.gov or call 800-555- 4477. T o contact EFTPS using T ele- communications Relay Services (TRS) for peo- ple who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech disability, dial 711 and then provide the TRS assistant the 800 -555- 4477 number or 800-733- 4829. Additional information about EFTPS is also available in Pub. 966. T o pay using a debit or credit card, you can call one of the following service providers. There is a convenience fee charged by these providers that varies by provider, card type, and payment amount. ACI Payments, Inc. 888-UPAY-TAXTM (888-872-9829) fed.acipayonline.com Link2Gov Corporation 888-PAY-1040TM (888-729-1040) www.PAY1040.com For the latest details on how to pay by phone, go to IRS.gov/Payments . Pay by cash. Y ou can pay your taxes in cash. T o find out about the different cash payment methods, go to IRS.gov/PayCash . Don’t send cash payments through the mail. Pay by check or money order. Make your check or money order payable to “United States T reasury” for the full amount due. Don't send cash. Don't attach the payment to your return. Show your correct name, address, SSN, day- time phone number, and the tax year and form number on the front of your check or money or- der. If you are filing a joint return, enter the SSN shown first on your tax return. Notice to taxpayers presenting checks. When you provide a check as payment, you au- thorize us either to use information from your check to make a one -time electronic fund trans- fer from your account or to process the payment as a check transaction. When we use informa- tion from your check to make an electronic fund transfer, funds may be withdrawn from your ac- count as soon as the same day we receive your payment, and you will not receive your check back from your financial institution. No checks of $100 million or more accep- ted. The IRS can’t accept a single check (in- cluding a cashier’s check) for amounts of $100,000,000 ($100 million) or more. If you are sending $100 million or more by check, you’ll need to spread the payment over two or more checks with each check made out for an amount less than $100 million. This limit doesn’t apply to other methods of payment (such as electronic payments). Please consider a method of payment other than check if the amount of the payment is over $100 million. Estimated tax payments. Don't include any 2025 estimated tax payment in the payment for your 2024 income tax return. See chapter 4 for information on how to pay estimated tax. Interest Interest is charged on tax you don't pay by the due date of your return. Interest is charged even if you get an extension of time for filing. If the IRS figures your tax for you, to avoid interest for late payment, you must pay the bill by the date specified on the bill or by the due date of your return, whichever is later. For information, see T ax Fig- ured by IRS in chapter 13. Interest on penalties. Interest is charged on the failure -to-file penalty, the accuracy -related penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date of the return (including extensions) to the date of payment. Interest on other penalties starts on the date of notice and demand, but isn't charged on penalties paid within 21 calendar days from the date of the notice (or within 10 business days if the notice is for $100,000 or more). Interest due to IRS error or delay. All or part of any interest you were charged can be for- given if the interest is due to an unreasonable error or delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in performing a ministerial or managerial act. A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani- cal act that occurs during the processing of your case. A managerial act includes personnel transfers and extended personnel training. A decision concerning the proper application of federal tax law isn't a ministerial or managerial act. The interest can be forgiven only if you aren’t responsible in any important way for the error or delay and the IRS has notified you in writing of the deficiency or payment. For more information, see Pub. 556. Interest and certain penalties may also be suspended for a limited period if you filed your return by the due date (including extensions) and the IRS doesn't provide you with a notice specifically stating your liability and the basis for it before the close of the 36-month period begin- ning on the later of: •The date the return is filed, or •The due date of the return without regard to extensions. For more information, see Pub. 556. Installment Agreement If you can’t pay the full amount due with your re- turn, you can ask to make monthly installment payments for the full or a partial amount. How- ever, you will be charged interest and may be charged a late payment penalty on the tax not paid by the date your return is due, even if your request to pay in installments is granted. If your request is granted, you must also pay a fee. T o limit the interest and penalty charges, pay as much of the tax as possible with your return. But TIPPage 18 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 19 --- before requesting an installment agreement, you should consider other less costly alterna- tives, such as a bank loan or credit card pay- ment. T o apply for an installment agreement on- line, go to IRS.gov/OPA . Y ou can also use Form 9465. In addition to paying by check or money or- der, you can use a credit or debit card or direct payment from your bank account to make in- stallment agreement payments. See How T o Pay, earlier. Gift To Reduce Debt Held by the Public Y ou can make a contribution (gift) to re- duce debt held by the public. If you wish to do so, go to Pay.gov and make a contribution by credit card, debit card, PayPal, checking account, or savings account. If you prefer, you can make a check payable to the “Bureau of Fiscal Service”. Send your check to: Bureau of the Fiscal Service ATTN: Department G P .O. Box 2188 Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188 Or enclose your separate check in the envelope with your income tax return. Don't add this gift to any tax you owe. For information on making this type of gift online, go to T reasururyDirect.gov/Help-Center/ Public-Debt-FAQs/#DebtFinance and see the information under “How do you make a contri- bution to reduce the debt?” Y ou may be able to deduct this gift as a charitable contribution on next year's tax return if you itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Name and Address After you have completed your return, fill in your name and address in the appropriate area of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Y ou must include your SSN in the cor- rect place on your tax return. P .O. box. If your post office doesn't deliver mail to your street address and you have a P .O. box, enter your P .O. box number on the line for your present home address instead of your street ad- dress. Foreign address. If your address is outside the United States or its territories, enter the city name on the appropriate line of your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Don't enter any other information on that line, but also complete the spaces below that line. 1.Foreign country name. 2.Foreign province/state/county. 3.Foreign postal code. CAUTION!Don’t abbreviate the country name. Follow the country's practice for entering the postal code and the name of the province, county, or state. Where Do I File? After you complete your return, you must send it to the IRS. Y ou can mail it or you may be able to file it electronically. See Why Should I File Elec- tronically , earlier. Mailing your paper return. Mail your paper return to the address shown in the Instructions for Form 1040. What Happens After I File? After you send your return to the IRS, you may have some questions. This section discusses concerns you may have about recordkeeping, your refund, and what to do if you move. What Records Should I Keep? This part discusses why you should keep re- cords, what kinds of records you should keep, and how long you should keep them. Y ou must keep records so that you can prepare a complete and accurate in- come tax return. The law doesn't re- quire any special form of records. However, you should keep all receipts, canceled checks or other proof of payment, and any other records to support any deductions or credits you claim. If you file a claim for refund, you must be able to prove by your records that you have overpaid your tax. This part doesn't discuss the records you should keep when operating a business. For in- formation on business records, see Pub. 583. Why Keep Records? Good records help you: •Identify sources of income. Y our records can identify the sources of your income to help you separate business from nonbusi- ness income and taxable from nontaxable income. •Keep track of expenses. Y ou can use your records to identify expenses for which you can claim a deduction. This helps you determine if you can itemize deductions on your tax return. •Keep track of the basis of property. Y ou need to keep records that show the basis of your property. This includes the original cost or other basis of the property and any improvements you made. •Prepare tax returns. Y ou need records to prepare your tax return. •Support items reported on tax returns. The IRS may question an item on your re- turn. Y our records will help you explain any item and arrive at the correct tax. If you can’t produce the correct documents, you RECORDSmay have to pay additional tax and be sub- ject to penalties. Kinds of Records To Keep The IRS doesn't require you to keep your re- cords in a particular way. Keep them in a man- ner that allows you and the IRS to determine your correct tax. Y ou can use your checkbook to keep a re- cord of your income and expenses. Y ou also need to keep documents, such as receipts and sales slips, that can help prove a deduction. In this section, you will find guidance about basic records that everyone should keep. The section also provides guidance about specific records you should keep for certain items. Electronic records. All requirements that ap- ply to hard copy books and records also apply to electronic storage systems that maintain tax books and records. When you replace hard copy books and records, you must maintain the electronic storage systems for as long as they are material to the administration of tax law. For details on electronic storage system re- quirements, see Revenue Procedure 97 -22, which is on page 9 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 1997-13 at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb97-13.pdf . Copies of tax returns. Y ou should keep cop- ies of your tax returns as part of your tax re- cords. They can help you prepare future tax re- turns, and you will need them if you file an amended return or are audited. Copies of your returns and other records can be helpful to your survivor or the executor or administrator of your estate. If necessary, you can request a copy of a re- turn and all attachments (including Form W -2) from the IRS by using Form 4506. There is a charge for a copy of a return. For information on the cost and where to file, see the Instructions for Form 4506. If you just need information from your return, you can order a transcript in one of the following ways. •Access your online account at IRS.gov/ Account . •Go to IRS.gov/T ranscript . •Use Form 4506-T or Form 4506T-EZ. •Call 800-908-9946. There is no fee for a transcript. For more infor- mation, see Form 4506-T . Basic Records Basic records are documents that everybody should keep. These are the records that prove your income and expenses. If you own a home or investments, your basic records should con- tain documents related to those items. Income. Y our basic records prove the amounts you report as income on your tax return. Y our in- come may include wages, dividends, interest, and partnership or S corporation distributions. Y our records can also prove that certain amounts aren’t taxable, such as tax -exempt in- terest.Page 19 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 17 --- Page 20 --- Note. If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy C until you begin receiving social security bene- fits. This will help protect your benefits in case there is a question about your work record or earnings in a particular year. Expenses. Y our basic records prove the ex- penses for which you claim a deduction (or credit) on your tax return. Y our deductions may include alimony, charitable contributions, mort- gage interest, and real estate taxes. Y ou may also have childcare expenses for which you can claim a credit. Home. Y our basic records should enable you to determine the basis or adjusted basis of your home. Y ou need this information to determine if you have a gain or loss when you sell your home or to figure depreciation if you use part of your home for business purposes or for rent. Y our records should show the purchase price, settlement or closing costs, and the cost of any improvements. They may also show any casu- alty losses deducted and insurance reimburse- ments for casualty losses. For detailed information on basis, including which settlement or closing costs are included in the basis of your home, see Pub. 551. When you sell your home, your records should show the sales price and any selling ex- penses, such as commissions. For information on selling your home, see Pub. 523. Investments. Y our basic records should ena- ble you to determine your basis in an invest- ment and whether you have a gain or loss when you sell it. Investments include stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. Y our records should show the purchase price, sales price, and commissions. They may also show any reinvested dividends, stock splits and dividends, load charges, and original issue discount (OID). For information on stocks, bonds, and mu- tual funds, see Pub. 550 and Pub. 551. Proof of Payment One of your basic records is proof of payment. Y ou should keep these records to support cer- tain amounts shown on your tax return. Proof of payment alone isn't proof that the item claimed on your return is allowable. Y ou should also keep other documents that will help prove that the item is allowable. Generally, you prove payment with a cash receipt, financial account statement, credit card statement, canceled check, or substitute check. If you make payments in cash, you should get a dated and signed receipt showing the amount and the reason for the payment. If you make payments using your bank ac- count, you may be able to prove payment with an account statement. Account statements. Y ou may be able to prove payment with a legible financial account statement prepared by your bank or other finan- cial institution. Pay statements. Y ou may have deductible ex- penses withheld from your paycheck, such as medical insurance premiums. Y ou should keep your year -end or final pay statements as proof of payment of these expenses.How Long To Keep Records Y ou must keep your records as long as they may be needed for the administration of any provision of the Internal Revenue Code. Gener- ally, this means you must keep records that sup- port items shown on your return until the period of limitations for that return runs out. The period of limitations is the period of time in which you can amend your return to claim a credit or refund or the IRS can assess additional tax. T able 1 -7 contains the periods of limitations that apply to income tax returns. Unless other- wise stated, the years refer to the period begin- ning after the return was filed. Returns filed be- fore the due date are treated as being filed on the due date. Period of Limitations T able 1-7. IF you... THEN the period is... 1File a return and (2), (3), and (4) don't apply to you,3 years. 2Don't report income that you should and it is more than 25% of the gross income shown on your return,6 years. 3File a fraudulent return, No limit. 4Don't file a return, No limit. 5File a claim for credit or refund after you filed your return,The later of 3 years or 2 years after tax was paid. 6File a claim for a loss from worthless securities or bad debt deduction,7 years. Property. Keep records relating to property un- til the period of limitations expires for the year in which you dispose of the property in a taxable disposition. Y ou must keep these records to fig- ure your basis for computing gain or loss when you sell or otherwise dispose of the property. Generally, if you received property in a non- taxable exchange, your basis in that property is the same as the basis of the property you gave up. Y ou must keep the records on the old prop- erty, as well as the new property, until the period of limitations expires for the year in which you dispose of the new property in a taxable dispo- sition. Refund Information Y ou can go online to check the status of your 2024 refund 24 hours after the IRS receives your e -filed return, or 4 weeks after you mail a paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with your re- turn, allow 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed elec- tronically) before checking your refund status. Be sure to have a copy of your 2024 tax return available because you will need to know the filing status, the first SSN shown on the return, and the exact whole -dollar amount of the re- fund. T o check on your refund, do one of the fol- lowing. •Go to IRS.gov/Refunds . •Download the free IRS2Go app to your smart phone and use it to check your re- fund status. •Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954. Interest on Refunds If you are due a refund, you may get interest on it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly. If the refund is made within 45 days after the due date of your return, no interest will be paid. If you file your return after the due date (includ- ing extensions), no interest will be paid if the re- fund is made within 45 days after the date you filed. If the refund isn't made within this 45 -day period, interest will be paid from the due date of the return or from the date you filed, whichever is later. Accepting a refund check doesn't change your right to claim an additional refund and in- terest. File your claim within the period of time that applies. See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund , later. If you don't accept a refund check, no more interest will be paid on the over- payment included in the check. Interest on erroneous refund. All or part of any interest you were charged on an erroneous refund will generally be forgiven. Any interest charged for the period before demand for repay- ment was made will be forgiven unless: 1.Y ou, or a person related to you, caused the erroneous refund in any way; or 2.The refund is more than $50,000. For example, if you claimed a refund of $100 on your return, but the IRS made an error and sent you $1,000, you wouldn't be charged inter- est for the time you held the $900 difference. Y ou must, however, repay the $900 when the IRS asks. Change of Address If you have moved, file your return using your new address. If you move after you filed your return, you should give the IRS clear and concise notifica- tion of your change of address. The notification may be written, electronic, or oral. Send written notification to the Internal Revenue Service Center serving your old address. Y ou can use Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex- pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv- ing your old address. This will help in forwarding your check to your new address (unless you chose direct deposit of your refund). For more information, see Revenue Procedure 2010 -16, 2010- 19 I.R.B. 664, available at IRS.gov/irb/ 2010-19_IRB/ar07.html . Be sure to include your SSN (and the name and SSN of your spouse if you filed a joint re- turn) in any correspondence with the IRS.Page 20 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 21 --- What if I Made a Mistake? Errors may delay your refund or result in notices being sent to you. If you discover an error, you can file an amended return or claim for refund. Amended Returns and Claims for Refund Y ou should correct your return if, after you have filed it, you find that: 1.Y ou didn't report some income, 2.Y ou claimed deductions or credits you shouldn't have claimed, 3.Y ou didn't claim deductions or credits you could have claimed, or 4.Y ou should have claimed a different filing status. (Once you file a joint return, you can’t choose to file separate returns for that year after the due date of the return. However, an executor may be able to make this change for a deceased spouse.) If you need a copy of your return, see Copies of tax returns under Kinds of Records T o Keep , earlier, in this chapter. Form 1040 -X. Use Form 1040 -X to correct a return you have already filed. Completing Form 1040 -X. On Form 1040- X, enter your income, deductions, and credits as you originally reported them on your return; the changes you are making; and the corrected amounts. Then, figure the tax on the corrected amount of taxable income and the amount you owe or your refund. If you owe tax, the IRS offers several pay- ment options. See How T o Pay , earlier. The tax owed won't be subtracted from any amount you had credited to your estimated tax. If you can’t pay the full amount due with your return, you can ask to make monthly installment payments. See Installment Agreement , earlier. If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part of the overpayment refunded to you, or you can apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you choose to get a refund, it will be sent separately from any refund shown on your original return. Filing Form 1040 -X. When completing Form 1040 -X, don't forget to show the year of your original return and explain all changes you made. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules needed to explain your changes. Mail your Form 1040 -X to the Internal Revenue Service Center serving the area where you now live (as shown in the Instructions for Form 1040 -X). However, if you are filing Form 1040 -X in re- sponse to a notice you received from the IRS, mail it to the address shown on the notice. File a separate form for each tax year in- volved. Y ou can file Form 1040 -X electronically to amend Form 1040 and 1040 -SR for the current year or the two prior tax periods. For more infor- mation, see Instructions for Form 1040-X. Time for filing a claim for refund. Generally, you must file your claim for a credit or refund within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-nal return or within 2 years after the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed be- fore the due date (without regard to extensions) are considered filed on the due date (even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi- day). These time periods are suspended while you are financially disabled , discussed later. If the last day for claiming a credit or refund is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can file the claim on the next business day. If you don't file a claim within this period, you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund. Federally declared disaster. If you were affected by a federally declared disaster, you may have additional time to file your amended return. See Pub. 556 for details. Protective claim for refund. Generally, a pro- tective claim is a formal claim or amended re- turn for credit or refund normally based on cur- rent litigation or expected changes in tax law or other legislation. Y ou file a protective claim when your right to a refund is contingent on fu- ture events and may not be determinable until after the statute of limitations expires. A valid protective claim doesn't have to list a particular dollar amount or demand an immediate refund. However, a valid protective claim must: •Be in writing and signed; •Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN, and other contact information; •Identify and describe the contingencies af- fecting the claim; •Clearly alert the IRS to the essential nature of the claim; and •Identify the specific year(s) for which a re- fund is sought. Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad- dress listed in the Instructions for Form 1040 -X under Where T o File. Generally, the IRS will delay action on the protective claim until the contingency is re- solved. Limit on amount of refund. If you file your claim within 3 years after the date you filed your return, the credit or refund can’t be more than the part of the tax paid within the 3 -year period (plus any extension of time for filing your return) immediately before you filed the claim. This time period is suspended while you are finan- cially disabled , discussed later. Tax paid. Payments, including estimated tax payments, made before the due date (without regard to extensions) of the original return are considered paid on the due date. For example, income tax withheld during the year is consid- ered paid on the due date of the return, which is April 15 for most taxpayers. Example 1. Y ou made estimated tax pay- ments of $500 and got an automatic extension of time to October 15, 2021, to file your 2020 in- come tax return. When you filed your return on that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On October 15, 2024, you filed an amended return and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed your claim within 3 years after you filed your original return, you can get a refund of up to $700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the 6-month extension period immediately before you filed the claim. Example 2. The situation is the same as in Example 1 , except you filed your return on Oc- tober 30, 2021, 2 weeks after the extension pe- riod ended. Y ou paid an additional $200 on that date. On October 30, 2024, you filed an amen- ded return and claimed a refund of $700. Al- though you filed your claim within 3 years from the date you filed your original return, the refund was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the 6 -month extension period imme- diately before you filed the claim. The estimated tax of $500 paid before that period can’t be re- funded or credited. If you file a claim more than 3 years after you file your return, the credit or refund can’t be more than the tax you paid within the 2 years immediately before you file the claim. Example. Y ou filed your 2020 tax return on April 15, 2021. Y ou paid taxes of $500. On No- vember 5, 2022, after an examination of your 2020 return, you had to pay an additional tax of $200. On May 12, 2024, you file a claim for a re- fund of $300. However, because you filed your claim more than 3 years after you filed your re- turn, your refund will be limited to the $200 you paid during the 2 years immediately before you filed your claim. Financially disabled. The time periods for claiming a refund are suspended for the period in which you are financially disabled. For a joint income tax return, only one spouse has to be fi- nancially disabled for the time period to be sus- pended. Y ou are financially disabled if you are unable to manage your financial affairs because of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or that has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months. However, you aren’t treated as finan- cially disabled during any period your spouse or any other person is authorized to act on your behalf in financial matters. T o claim that you are financially disabled, you must send in the following written state- ments with your claim for refund. 1.A statement from your qualified physician that includes: a.The name and a description of your physical or mental impairment; b.The physician's medical opinion that the impairment prevented you from managing your financial affairs; c.The physician's medical opinion that the impairment was or can be expec- ted to result in death, or that its dura- tion has lasted, or can be expected to last, at least 12 months; d.The specific time period (to the best of the physician's knowledge); and e.The following certification signed by the physician: “I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the above representations are true, correct, and complete.”Page 21 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 1 Filing Information 19 --- Page 22 --- 2.A statement made by the person signing the claim for credit or refund that no per- son, including your spouse, was author- ized to act on your behalf in financial mat- ters during the period of disability (or the exact dates that a person was authorized to act for you). Exceptions for special types of refunds. If you file a claim for one of the items in the follow- ing list, the dates and limits discussed earlier may not apply. These items, and where to get more information, are as follows. •Bad debt. See Pub. 550. •Worthless security. See Pub. 550. •Foreign tax paid or accrued. See Pub. 514. •Net operating loss carryback. See Form 172 and the Instructions for Form 172. •Carryback of certain business tax credits. See Form 3800. •Claim based on an agreement with the IRS extending the period for assessment of tax. Processing claims for refund. Claims are usually processed 8–12 weeks after they are filed. Y our claim may be accepted as filed, disal- lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is examined, the procedures are the same as in the examination of a tax return. If your claim is disallowed, you will receive an explanation of why it was disallowed. Taking your claim to court. Y ou can sue for a refund in court, but you must first file a timely claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your claim or doesn't act on your claim within 6 months after you file it, you can then take your claim to court. For information on the burden of proof in a court proceeding, see Pub. 556. The IRS provides a direct method to move your claim to court if: •Y ou are filing a claim for a credit or refund based solely on contested income tax or on estate tax or gift tax issues considered in your previously examined returns, and •Y ou want to take your case to court instead of appealing it within the IRS. When you file your claim with the IRS, you get the direct method by requesting in writing that your claim be immediately rejected. A no- tice of claim disallowance will be sent to you. Y ou have 2 years from the date of mailing of the notice of claim disallowance to file a refund suit in the U.S. District Court having jurisdiction or in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims. Interest on refund. If you receive a refund be- cause of your amended return, interest will be paid on it from the due date of your original re- turn or the date you filed your original return, whichever is later, to the date you filed the amended return. However, if the refund isn't made within 45 days after you file the amended return, interest will be paid up to the date the re- fund is paid. Reduced refund. Y our refund may be reduced by an additional tax liability that has been as- sessed against you.Also, your refund may be reduced by amounts you owe for past -due federal tax, state income tax, state unemployment compensation debts, child support, spousal support, or certain other federal nontax debts, such as student loans. If your spouse owes these debts, see Offset against debts under Refunds , earlier, for the correct refund procedures to follow. Effect on state tax liability. If your return is changed for any reason, it may affect your state income tax liability. This includes changes made as a result of an examination of your re- turn by the IRS. Contact your state tax agency for more information. Penalties The law provides penalties for failure to file re- turns or pay taxes as required. Civil Penalties If you don't file your return and pay your tax by the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. Y ou may also have to pay a penalty if you sub- stantially understate your tax, understate a re- portable transaction, file an erroneous claim for refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submission, or fail to supply your SSN or ITIN. If you provide fraudulent information on your return, you may have to pay a civil fraud penalty. Filing late. If you don't file your return by the due date (including extensions), you may have to pay a failure -to-file penalty. The penalty is usually 5% for each month or part of a month that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The penalty is based on the tax not paid by the due date (without regard to extensions). Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud, the penalty is 15% for each month or part of a month that your return is late, up to a maximum of 75%. Return over 60 days late. If you file your re- turn more than 60 days after the due date, or extended due date, the minimum penalty is the smaller of $510 or 100% of the unpaid tax. Exception. Y ou won't have to pay the pen- alty if you show that you failed to file on time be- cause of reasonable cause and not because of willful neglect. Paying tax late. Y ou will have to pay a fail- ure-to- pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (0.50%) of your unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month, after the due date that the tax isn't paid. This penalty doesn't apply during the automatic 6-month extension of time to file period if you paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on or before the due date of your return and pay the balance when you file the return. The monthly rate of the failure -to-pay pen- alty is half the usual rate (0.25% instead of 0.50%) if an installment agreement is in effect for that month. Y ou must have filed your return by the due date (including extensions) to qualify for this reduced penalty. If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate will increase to 1% at the start of the first month beginning at least 10 days after the day that the notice is issued. If a notice and demand for im- mediate payment is issued, the rate will increase to 1% at the start of the first month be- ginning after the day that the notice and de- mand is issued. This penalty can’t be more than 25% of your unpaid tax. Y ou won't have to pay the penalty if you can show that you had a good reason for not paying your tax on time. Combined penalties. If both the failure -to-file penalty and the failure -to-pay penalty (dis- cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or 15%) failure -to-file penalty is reduced by the failure-to- pay penalty. However, if you file your return more than 60 days after the due date or extended due date, the minimum penalty is the smaller of $510 or 100% of the unpaid tax. Accuracy- related penalty. Y ou may have to pay an accuracy- related penalty if you underpay your tax because: 1.Y ou show negligence or disregard of the rules or regulations, 2.Y ou substantially understate your income tax, 3.Y ou claim tax benefits for a transaction that lacks economic substance, or 4.Y ou fail to disclose a foreign financial as- set. The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay- ment. The penalty is 40% of any portion of the underpayment that is attributable to an undis- closed noneconomic substance transaction or an undisclosed foreign financial asset transac- tion. The penalty won't be figured on any part of an underpayment on which the fraud penalty (discussed later) is charged. Negligence or disregard. The term “negli- gence” includes a failure to make a reasonable attempt to comply with the tax law or to exercise ordinary and reasonable care in preparing a re- turn. Negligence also includes failure to keep adequate books and records. Y ou won't have to pay a negligence penalty if you have a reasona- ble basis for a position you took. The term “disregard” includes any careless, reckless, or intentional disregard. Adequate disclosure. Y ou can avoid the penalty for disregard of rules or regulations if you adequately disclose on your return a posi- tion that has at least a reasonable basis. See Disclosure statement , later. This exception won't apply to an item that is attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it won't apply if you fail to keep adequate books and re- cords, or substantiate items properly. Substantial understatement of income tax. Y ou understate your tax if the tax shown on your return is less than the correct tax. The un- derstatement is substantial if it is more than the larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How- ever, the amount of the understatement may be reduced to the extent the understatement is due to: 1.Substantial authority, or 2.Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba- sis. If an item on your return is attributable to a tax shelter, there is no reduction for an adequate disclosure. However, there is a reduction for a Page 22 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 20 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 23 --- position with substantial authority, but only if you reasonably believed that your tax treatment was more likely than not the proper treatment. Substantial authority. Whether there is or was substantial authority for the tax treatment of an item depends on the facts and circumstan- ces. Some of the items that may be considered are court opinions, T reasury regulations, reve- nue rulings, revenue procedures, and notices and announcements issued by the IRS and published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that involve the same or similar circumstances as yours. Disclosure statement. T o adequately dis- close the relevant facts about your tax treatment of an item, use Form 8275. Y ou must also have a reasonable basis for treating the item the way you did. In cases of substantial understatement only, items that meet the requirements of Revenue Procedure 2023- 40 (or later update) are consid- ered adequately disclosed on your return with- out filing Form 8275. Use Form 8275 -R to disclose items or posi- tions contrary to regulations. Transaction lacking economic substance. For more information on economic substance, see section 7701(o). Foreign financial asset. For more informa- tion on undisclosed foreign financial assets, see section 6662(j). Reasonable cause. Y ou won't have to pay a penalty if you show a good reason (reasonable cause) for the way you treated an item. Y ou must also show that you acted in good faith. This doesn't apply to a transaction that lacks economic substance. Filing erroneous claim for refund or credit. Y ou may have to pay a penalty if you file an erro- neous claim for refund or credit. The penalty is equal to 20% of the disallowed amount of the claim, unless you can show a reasonable basis for the way you treated an item. However, any disallowed amount due to a transaction that lacks economic substance won't be treated as having a reasonable basis. The penalty won't be figured on any part of the disallowed amount of the claim that relates to the earned income credit or on which the accuracy -related or fraud penalties are charged. Frivolous tax submission. Y ou may have to pay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax return or other frivolous submissions. A frivolous tax return is one that doesn't include enough in- formation to figure the correct tax or that con- tains information clearly showing that the tax you reported is substantially incorrect. For more information on frivolous returns, frivolous sub- missions, and a list of positions that are identi- fied as frivolous, see Notice 2010 -33, 2010 -17 I.R.B. 609, available at IRS.gov/irb/ 2010-17_IRB/ar13.html . Y ou will have to pay the penalty if you filed this kind of return or submission based on a friv- olous position or a desire to delay or interfere with the administration of federal tax laws. This includes altering or striking out the preprinted language above the space provided for your signature.This penalty is added to any other penalty provided by law. Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the underpayment due to fraud will be added to your tax. Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint re- turn doesn't apply to a spouse unless some part of the underpayment is due to the fraud of that spouse. Failure to supply SSN. If you don't include your SSN or the SSN of another person where required on a return, statement, or other docu- ment, you will be subject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. Y ou will also be subject to a pen- alty of $50 if you don't give your SSN to another person when it is required on a return, state- ment, or other document. For example, if you have a bank account that earns interest, you must give your SSN to the bank. The number must be shown on the Form 1099- INT or other statement the bank sends you. If you don't give the bank your SSN, you will be subject to the $50 penalty. (Y ou may also be subject to “backup” withholding of income tax. See chapter 4 .) Y ou won't have to pay the penalty if you are able to show that the failure was due to reason- able cause and not willful neglect. Criminal Penalties Y ou may be subject to criminal prosecution (brought to trial) for actions such as: 1.T ax evasion; 2.Willful failure to file a return, supply infor- mation, or pay any tax due; 3.Fraud and false statements; 4.Preparing and filing a fraudulent return; or 5.Identity theft. Identity Theft Identity theft occurs when someone uses your personal information such as your name, SSN, or other identifying information, without your permission, to commit fraud or other crimes. An identity thief may use your SSN to get a job or may file a tax return using your SSN to receive a refund. T o reduce your risk: •Protect your SSN, •Ensure your employer is protecting your SSN, and •Be careful when choosing a tax preparer. If your tax records are affected by identity theft and you receive a notice from the IRS, re- spond right away to the name and phone num- ber printed on the IRS notice or letter. If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you suspect you are a victim of tax -related identity theft, visit IRS.gov/IdentityTheft to learn what steps you should take. For more information, see Pub. 5027.All taxpayers are now eligible for an Identity Protection Personal Identifica- tion Number (IP PIN). For more infor- mation, see Pub. 5477. T o apply for an IP PIN, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN and use the Get an IP PIN tool. Victims of identity theft who are experienc- ing economic harm or a systemic problem, or are seeking help in resolving tax problems that have not been resolved through normal chan- nels, may be eligible for T axpayer Advocate Service (TAS) assistance. Y ou can reach TAS by calling the National T axpayer Advocate help- line at 877 -777- 4778 or 800 -829- 4059 (TTY/ TDD). Deaf or hard -of-hearing individuals can also contact the IRS through the T elecommuni- cations Relay Services (TRS) at FCC.gov/TRS . Protect yourself from suspicious emails or phishing schemes. Phishing is the creation and use of email and websites designed to mimic legitimate business emails and websites. The most common form is the act of sending an email to a user falsely claiming to be an estab- lished legitimate enterprise in an attempt to scam the user into surrendering private informa- tion that will be used for identity theft. The IRS doesn't initiate contact with taxpay- ers via emails. Also, the IRS doesn't request de- tailed personal information through email or ask taxpayers for the PIN numbers, passwords, or similar secret access information for their credit card, bank, or other financial accounts. If you receive an unsolicited email claiming to be from the IRS, forward the message to phishing@irs.gov . Y ou may also report misuse of the IRS name, logo, forms, or other IRS prop- erty to the T reasury Inspector General for T ax Administration toll free at 800 -366- 4484. Y ou can forward suspicious emails to the Federal T rade Commission (FTC) at spam@uce.gov or report them at ftc.gov/complaint . Y ou can con- tact them at ftc.gov/idtheft or 877 -IDTHEFT (877-438- 4338). If you have been a victim of identity theft, see IdentityTheft.gov or Pub. 5027. People who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech disability and who have access to TTY/TDD equipment can call 866-653-4261. Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection to learn more about identity theft and how to reduce your risk. 2. Filing Status Introduction This chapter helps you determine which filing status to use. There are five filing statuses. •Single. •Married filing jointly. •Married filing separately. •Head of household. TIPPage 23 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 2 Filing Status 21 --- Page 24 --- •Qualifying surviving spouse. If more than one filing status applies to you, choose the one that will give you the lowest tax. Y ou must determine your filing status before you can determine whether you must file a tax return ( chapter 1 ), your standard deduction (chapter 10 ), and your tax ( chapter 11 ). Y ou also use your filing status to determine whether you are eligible to claim certain deductions and credits. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 3 Armed Forces’ T ax Guide 501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information 503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses 519 U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens 555 Community Property 559 Survivors, Executors, and Administrators 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC) 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules 971 Innocent Spouse Relief For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Marital Status In general, your filing status depends on whether you are considered unmarried or mar- ried. Unmarried persons. Y ou are considered un- married for the whole year if, on the last day of your tax year, you are either: •Unmarried, or •Legally separated from your spouse under a divorce or separate maintenance decree. State law governs whether you are married or legally separated under a divorce or separate maintenance decree. Definition of marriage. A marriage of two indi- viduals is recognized for federal tax purposes if the marriage is recognized by the state or terri- tory of the United States in which the marriage is entered into, regardless of legal residence. T wo individuals who enter into a relationship that is denominated as marriage under the laws of a foreign jurisdiction or an American Indian tribe are recognized as married for federal tax purposes if the relationship would be recog- nized as marriage under the laws of at least one state or territory of the United States, regardless of legal residence. Individuals who have en- tered into a registered domestic partnership, civil union, or other similar relationship that isn’t denominated as a marriage under the law of the state or territory of the United States where such relationship was entered into aren’t law- fully married for federal tax purposes, regard- less of legal residence. See Considered mar- ried, next. TIP 3 501 503 519 555 559 596 925 971Divorced persons. If you are divorced un- der a final decree by the last day of the year, you are considered unmarried for the whole year. Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a di- vorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the time of divorce you intend to and do, in fact, remarry each other in the next tax year, you and your spouse must file as married individuals in both years. Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court decree of annulment, which holds that no valid marriage ever existed, you are considered un- married even if you filed joint returns for earlier years. File Form 1040 -X, Amended U.S. Individ- ual Income T ax Return, claiming single or head of household status for all tax years that are af- fected by the annulment and not closed by the statute of limitations for filing a tax return. Gen- erally, for a credit or refund, you must file Form 1040- X within 3 years (including extensions) af- ter the date you filed your original return or within 2 years after the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. If you filed your original return early (for example, March 1), your return is con- sidered filed on the due date (generally April 15). However, if you had an extension to file (for example, until October 15) but you filed earlier and we received it on July 1, your return is con- sidered filed on July 1. Head of household or qualifying surviv- ing spouse. If you are considered unmarried, you may be able to file as head of household or as qualifying surviving spouse. See Head of Household and Qualifying Surviving Spouse , later, to see if you qualify. Married persons. If you are considered mar- ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return or separate returns. Considered married. Y ou are considered married for the whole year if, on the last day of your tax year, you and your spouse meet any one of the following tests. 1.Y ou are married and living together. 2.Y ou are living together in a common law marriage recognized in the state where you now live or in the state where the com- mon law marriage began. 3.Y ou are married and living apart, but not legally separated under a decree of di- vorce or separate maintenance. 4.Y ou are separated under an interlocutory (not final) decree of divorce. Spouse died during the year. If your spouse died during the year, you are consid- ered married for the whole year for filing status purposes. If you didn't remarry before the end of the tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 years, you may be entitled to the special bene- fits described later under Qualifying Surviving Spouse . If you remarried before the end of the tax year, you can file a joint return with your new spouse. Y our deceased spouse's filing status is married filing separately for that year.Married persons living apart. If you live apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, you may be able to file as head of household even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. If you qualify to file as head of household in- stead of married filing separately, your standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax may be lower, and you may be able to claim the earned income credit (EIC). See Head of Household , later. Single Y our filing status is single if you are considered unmarried and you don’t qualify for another fil- ing status. T o determine your marital status, see Marital Status , earlier. Spouse died before January 1, 2024. Y our filing status may be single if your spouse died before January 1, 2024, and you didn't remarry before the end of 2024. Y ou may, however, be able to use another filing status that will give you a lower tax. See Head of Household and Qualifying Surviving Spouse , later, to see if you qualify. How to file. On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show your filing status as single by checking the “Sin- gle” box on the Filing Status line near the top of the form. Use the Single column of the T ax T a- ble, or Section A of the T ax Computation Work- sheet, to figure your tax. Married Filing Jointly Y ou can choose married filing jointly as your fil- ing status if you are considered married and both you and your spouse agree to file a joint re- turn. On a joint return, you and your spouse re- port your combined income and deduct your combined allowable expenses. Y ou can file a joint return even if one of you had no income or deductions. If you and your spouse decide to file a joint return, your tax may be lower than your com- bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your standard deduction (if you don’t itemize deduc- tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax benefits that don’t apply to other filing sta- tuses. How to file. On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show your filing status as married filing jointly by checking the “Married filing jointly” box on the Filing Status line near the top of the form. Use the Married filing jointly column of the T ax T able, or Section B of the T ax Computation Work- sheet, to figure your tax. If you and your spouse each have in- come, you may want to figure your tax both on a joint return and on separate returns (using the filing status of married filing separately). Y ou can choose the method that gives the two of you the lower combined tax un- less you are required to file separately. Spouse died. If your spouse died during the year, you are considered married for the whole year and can choose married filing jointly as your filing status. See Spouse died during the year under Married persons , earlier, for more in- formation. TIPPage 24 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 25 --- If your spouse died in 2025 before filing a 2024 return, you can choose married filing jointly as your filing status on your 2024 return. Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a final decree by the last day of the year, you are considered unmarried for the whole year and you can’t choose married filing jointly as your fil- ing status. Filing a Joint Return Both you and your spouse must include all of your income and deductions on your joint re- turn. Accounting period. Both of you must use the same accounting period, but you can use differ- ent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri- ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1. Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax and any interest or penalty due on your joint re- turn. This means that if one spouse doesn't pay the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if one spouse doesn't report the correct tax, both spouses may be responsible for any additional taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse may be held responsible for all the tax due even if all the income was earned by the other spouse. Y ou may want to file separately if: •Y ou believe your spouse isn't reporting all of their income, or •Y ou don’t want to be responsible for any taxes due if your spouse doesn't have enough tax withheld or doesn't pay enough estimated tax. Divorced taxpayer. Y ou may be held jointly and individually responsible for any tax, interest, and penalties due on a joint return filed before your divorce. This responsibility may apply even if your divorce decree states that your former spouse will be responsible for any amounts due on previously filed joint returns. Relief from joint responsibility. In some cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re- sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for items of the other spouse that were incorrectly reported on the joint return. Y ou can ask for relief no matter how small the liabil- ity. There are three types of relief available. 1.Innocent spouse relief. 2.Separation of liability (available only to joint filers whose spouse has died, or who are divorced, legally separated, or haven't lived together for the 12 months ending on the date the election for this relief is filed). 3.Equitable relief. Y ou must file Form 8857, Request for Inno- cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint responsibility. Pub. 971 explains these kinds of relief and who may qualify for them. Signing a joint return. For a return to be con- sidered a joint return, both spouses must gener- ally sign the return. Spouse died before signing. If your spouse died before signing the return, the exec- utor or administrator must sign the return for your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has yet been appointed as executor or administra- tor, you can sign the return for your spouse and enter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area where you sign the return. Spouse away from home. If your spouse is away from home, you should prepare the return, sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that it can be filed on time. Injury or disease prevents signing. If your spouse can’t sign because of disease or injury and tells you to sign for them, you can sign your spouse’s name in the proper space on the re- turn followed by the words “By (your name), Spouse.” Be sure to sign in the space provided for your signature. Attach a dated statement, signed by you, to the return. The statement should include the form number of the return you are filing, the tax year, and the reason your spouse can’t sign; it should also state that your spouse has agreed to your signing for them. Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in- competent, you can sign the return for your spouse as guardian. Spouse in combat zone. Y ou can sign a joint return for your spouse if your spouse can’t sign because they are serving in a combat zone (such as the Persian Gulf Area, Serbia, Monte- negro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if you don’t have a power of attorney or other state- ment. Attach a signed statement to your return explaining that your spouse is serving in a com- bat zone. For more information on special tax rules for persons who are serving in a combat zone, or who are in missing status as a result of serving in a combat zone, see Pub. 3. Power of attorney. In order for you to sign a return for your spouse in any of these cases, you must attach to the return a power of attor- ney (POA) that authorizes you to sign for your spouse. Y ou can use a POA that states that you have been granted authority to sign the return, or you can use Form 2848. Part I of Form 2848 must state that you are granted authority to sign the return. Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen- erally, a married couple can’t file a joint return if either one is a nonresident alien at any time dur- ing the tax year. However, if one spouse was a nonresident alien or dual -status alien who was married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the year, the spouses can choose to file a joint return. If you do file a joint return, you and your spouse are both treated as U.S. residents for the entire tax year. See chapter 1 of Pub. 519. Married Filing Separately Y ou can choose married filing separately as your filing status if you are married. This filing status may benefit you if you want to be respon- sible only for your own tax or if it results in less tax than filing a joint return.If you and your spouse don’t agree to file a joint return, you must use this filing status un- less you qualify for head of household status, discussed later. Y ou may be able to choose head of house- hold filing status if you are considered unmar- ried because you live apart from your spouse and meet certain tests (explained under Head of Household , later). This can apply to you even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. If you qualify to file as head of household, instead of as married filing separately, your tax may be lower, you may be able to claim the EIC and certain other benefits, and your standard de- duction will be higher. The head of household filing status allows you to choose the standard deduction even if your spouse chooses to item- ize deductions. See Head of Household , later, for more information. Y ou will generally pay more combined tax on separate returns than you would on a joint return for the reasons listed under Special Rules , later. However, unless you are required to file separately, you should figure your tax both ways (on a joint return and on sep- arate returns). This way, you can make sure you are using the filing status that results in the low- est combined tax. When figuring the combined tax of a married couple, you may want to con- sider state taxes as well as federal taxes. How to file. If you file a separate return, you generally report only your own income, credits, and deductions. Select this filing status by checking the “Married filing separately” box on the Filing Sta- tus line near the top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter your spouse's full name and SSN or ITIN in the entry space at the bottom of the Filing Status section. If your spouse doesn't have and isn't required to have an SSN or ITIN, enter “NRA” in the space for your spouse's SSN. Use the Married filing separately column of the T ax T able, or Section C of the T ax Computation Worksheet, to figure your tax. Special Rules If you choose married filing separately as your filing status, the following special rules apply. Because of these special rules, you usually pay more tax on a separate return than if you use another filing status you qualify for. 1.Y our tax rate is generally higher than on a joint return. 2.Y our exemption amount for figuring the al- ternative minimum tax is half that allowed on a joint return. 3.Y ou can’t take the credit for child and de- pendent care expenses in most cases, and the amount you can exclude from in- come under an employer's dependent care assistance program is limited to $2,500 (instead of $5,000 on a joint re- turn). However, if you are legally separated or living apart from your spouse, you may be able to file a separate return and still take the credit. For more information about these expenses, the credit, and the exclu- sion, see What’s Y our Filing Status? in Pub. 503. TIPPage 25 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 2 Filing Status 23 --- Page 26 --- 4.Y ou can’t take the EIC, unless you have a qualifying child and meet certain other re- quirements. See Pub. 596. 5.Y ou can’t take the exclusion or credit for adoption expenses in most cases. 6.Y ou can’t take the education credits (the American opportunity credit and lifetime learning credit), or the deduction for stu- dent loan interest. 7.Y ou can’t exclude any interest income from qualified U.S. savings bonds you used for higher education expenses. 8.If you lived with your spouse at any time during the tax year: a.Y ou can’t claim the credit for the eld- erly or the disabled, and b.Y ou must include in income a greater percentage (up to 85%) of any social security or equivalent railroad retire- ment benefits you received. 9.The following credits and deductions are reduced at income levels half of those for a joint return. a.The child tax credit and the credit for other dependents. b.The retirement savings contributions credit. 10. Y our capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 (instead of $3,000 on a joint return). 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you can’t claim the standard deduction. If you can claim the standard deduction, your ba- sic standard deduction is half of the amount allowed on a joint return. Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits. If your AGI on a separate return is lower than it would have been on a joint return, you may be able to deduct a larger amount for certain deductions that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen- ses. Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). Y ou may not be able to deduct all or part of your contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your spouse was covered by an employee retirement plan at work during the year. Y our deduction is reduced or eliminated if your income is more than a certain amount. This amount is much lower for married individuals who file separately and lived together at any time during the year. For more information, see How Much Can Y ou Deduct in chapter 9. Rental activity losses. If you actively partici- pated in a passive rental real estate activity that produced a loss, you can generally deduct the loss from your nonpassive income, up to $25,000. This is called a special allowance. However, married persons filing separate re- turns who lived together at any time during the year can’t claim this special allowance. Married persons filing separate returns who lived apart at all times during the year are each allowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance for losses from passive real estate activities. See Rental Activities in Pub. 925 for more information. Community property states. If you live in a community property state and file separately, your income may be considered separate in-come or community income for income tax pur- poses. Community property states include Ari- zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, T exas, Washington, and Wisconsin. See Pub. 555 for more information. Joint Return After Separate Returns Y ou can change your filing status from a sepa- rate return to a joint return by filing an amended return using Form 1040-X. Y ou can generally change to a joint return any time within 3 years from the due date of the separate return or returns. This doesn't include any extensions. A separate return includes a re- turn filed by you or your spouse claiming mar- ried filing separately, single, or head of house- hold filing status. Separate Returns After Joint Return Once you file a joint return, you can’t choose to file separate returns for that year after the due date of the return. Exception. A personal representative for a de- cedent can change from a joint return elected by the surviving spouse to a separate return for the decedent. The personal representative has 1 year from the due date (including extensions) of the return to make the change. See Pub. 559 for more information on filing a return for a dece- dent. Head of Household Y ou may be able to file as head of household if you meet all of the following requirements. 1.Y ou are unmarried or considered unmar- ried on the last day of the year. See Marital Status , earlier, and Considered Unmar- ried, later. 2.Y ou paid more than half of the cost of keeping up a home for the year. 3.A qualifying person lived with you in the home for more than half the year (except for temporary absences, such as school). However, if the qualifying person is your dependent parent, your dependent parent doesn't have to live with you. See Special rule for parent , later, under Qualifying Per- son. If you qualify to file as head of house- hold, your tax rate will usually be lower than the rates for single or married fil- ing separately. Y ou will also receive a higher standard deduction than if you file as single or married filing separately. How to file. Indicate your choice of this filing status by checking the “Head of household” box on the Filing Status line near the top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who qualifies you for this filing status isn't claimed as your de- pendent in the Dependents section of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child's name in the entry space at the bottom of the Filing Status section. Use the Head of a household column of the T ax T able, or Section D of the T ax Com- putation Worksheet, to figure your tax. TIPConsidered Unmarried T o qualify for head of household status, you must be either unmarried or considered unmar- ried on the last day of the year. Y ou are consid- ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if you meet all of the following tests. 1.Y ou file a separate return. A separate re- turn includes a return claiming married fil- ing separately, single, or head of house- hold filing status. 2.Y ou paid more than half of the cost of keeping up your home for the tax year. 3.Y our spouse didn't live in your home during the last 6 months of the tax year. Y our spouse is considered to live in your home even if your spouse is temporarily absent due to special circumstances. See T empo- rary absences under Qualifying Person , later. 4.Y our home was the main home of your child, stepchild, or foster child for more than half the year. (See Home of qualifying person under Qualifying Person , later, for rules applying to a child's birth, death, or temporary absence during the year.) 5.Y ou must be able to claim the child as a dependent. However, you meet this test if you can’t claim the child as a dependent only because the noncustodial parent can claim the child using the rules described in Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualify- ing Child in chapter 3, or referred to in Support T est for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) under Qualifying Relative in chap- ter 3. The general rules for claiming a child as a dependent are explained in chapter 3. Y ou may be considered unmarried for the purpose of using head of household status but not for other purposes, such as claiming the EIC. Different tests apply depending on the tax benefit you claim. If you were considered married for part of the year and lived in a community property state (listed earlier under Mar- ried Filing Separately ), special rules may apply in determining your income and expenses. See Pub. 555 for more information. Nonresident alien spouse. Y ou are consid- ered unmarried for head of household purposes if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any time during the year and you don’t choose to treat your nonresident spouse as a resident alien. However, your spouse isn't a qualifying person for head of household purposes. Y ou must have another qualifying person and meet the other tests to be eligible to file as head of household. Choice to treat spouse as resident. Y ou are considered married if you choose to treat your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 of Pub. 519. Keeping Up a Home T o qualify for head of household status, you must pay more than half of the cost of keeping CAUTION!Page 26 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 27 --- up a home for the year. Y ou can determine whether you paid more than half of the cost of keeping up a home by using Worksheet 2 -1. Costs you include. Include in the cost of keeping up a home expenses, such as rent, mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. Costs you don’t include. Don’t include the costs of clothing, education, medical treatment, vacations, life insurance, or transportation. Also don’t include the value of your services or those of a member of your household. Qualifying Person See T able 2 -1 to see who is a qualifying person. Any person not described in T able 2 -1 isn't a qualifying person. Example 1 —Child. Y our unmarried child lived with you all year and was 18 years old at the end of the year. Y our child didn't provide more than half of their own support and doesn't meet the tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else. As a result, this child is your qualifying child (see Qualifying Child in chapter 3) and, because this child is single, this is your qualify- ing person for head of household purposes. Example 2 —Child who isn't qualifying person. The facts are the same as in Exam- ple 1 , except your child was 25 years old at the end of the year and your child’s gross income was $6,000. Because your child doesn't meet the age test (explained under Qualifying Child in chapter 3), your child isn't your qualifying child. Because the child doesn't meet the gross in- come test (explained under Qualifying Relative in chapter 3), the child isn't your qualifying rela- tive. As a result, this child isn't your qualifying person for head of household purposes. Example 3 —Friend. Y our friend lived with you all year. Even though your friend may be your qualifying relative if the gross income and support tests (explained in chapter 3) are met, your friend isn't your qualifying person for head of household purposes because your friend isn't related to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live with you in chapter 3. See T able 2 -1. Example 4 —Friend's child. The facts are the same as in Example 3 , except your friend's 10-year- old child also lived with you all year. Y our friend’s child isn't your qualifying child and, because the child is your friend's qualifying child, your friend’s child isn't your qualifying rel- ative (see Not a Qualifying Child T est in chap- ter 3). As a result, your friend’s child isn't your qualifying person for head of household purpo- ses. Home of qualifying person. Generally, the qualifying person must live with you for more than half the year. Special rule for parent. If your qualifying person is your parent, you may be eligible to file as head of household even if your parent doesn't live with you. However, you must be able to claim your parent as a dependent. Also, you must pay more than half of the cost of keep- ing up a home that was the main home for the entire year for your parent. If you pay more than half of the cost of keep- ing your parent in a rest home or home for the elderly, that counts as paying more than half of the cost of keeping up your parent's main home. Death or birth. Y ou may be eligible to file as head of household even if the individual who qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies during the year. If the individual is your qualify- ing child, the child must have lived with you for more than half the part of the year the child was alive. If the individual is anyone else, see Pub. 501 for more information. Temporary absences. Y ou and your quali- fying person are considered to live together even if one or both of you are temporarily ab- sent from your home due to special circumstan- ces, such as illness, education, business, vacation, military service, or detention in a juve- nile facility. It must be reasonable to assume the absent person will return to the home after the temporary absence. Y ou must continue to keep up the home during the absence. Adopted child or foster child. Y ou may be eligible to file as head of household if the per- son who qualifies you for this filing status was an adopted child or foster child. For more infor- mation, see Pub. 501. Kidnapped child. Y ou may be eligible to file as head of household even if the child who is your qualifying person has been kidnapped. For more information, see Pub. 501. Qualifying Surviving Spouse If your spouse died in 2024, you can use mar- ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2024 if you otherwise qualify to use that status. The year of death is the last year for which you can file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar- ried Filing Jointly , earlier. Y ou may be eligible to use qualifying surviv- ing spouse as your filing status for 2 years fol- lowing the year your spouse died. For example, if your spouse died in 2023, and you haven't re- married, you may be able to use this filing status for 2024 and 2025. This filing status entitles you to use joint re- turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc- tion amount (if you don’t itemize deductions). It doesn't entitle you to file a joint return. How to file. Indicate your choice of this filing status by checking the “Qualifying surviving spouse” box on the Filing Status line near the top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who qualifies you for this filing status isn’t claimed as your dependent in the Dependents section of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child’s name in the entry space at the bottom of the Filing Status section. Use the Married filing jointly col- umn of the T ax T able, or Section B of the T ax Computation Worksheet, to figure your tax. Eligibility rules. Y ou are eligible to file your 2024 return as a qualifying surviving spouse if you meet all of the following tests. •Y ou were entitled to file a joint return with your spouse for the year your spouse died. It doesn't matter whether you actually filed a joint return. •Y our spouse died in 2022 or 2023 and you didn't remarry before the end of 2024. •Y ou have a child or stepchild (not a foster child) whom you can claim as a dependent or could claim as a dependent except that, for 2024: a. The child had gross income of $5,050 or more, b. The child filed a joint return, or c. Y ou could be claimed as a depend- ent on someone else’s return. If the child isn't claimed as your de- pendent in the Dependents section on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child's name in the entry space at the bottom of Worksheet 2-1. Cost of Keeping Up a Home Keep for Y our Records Amount You Paid Total Cost Property taxes $ $ Mortgage interest expense Rent Utility charges Repairs/Maintenance Property insurance Food eaten in the home Other household expenses Totals $ $ Minus total amount you paid ( ) Amount others paid $ If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more than half of the cost of keeping up the home.Page 27 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 2 Filing Status 25 --- Page 28 --- the Filing Status section. If you don’t enter the name, it will take us longer to process your return. •This child lived in your home all year, ex- cept for temporary absences. See T empo- rary absences , earlier, under Head of Household . There are also exceptions, de- scribed later, for a child who was born or died during the year and for a kidnapped child. •Y ou paid more than half of the cost of keeping up a home for the year. See Keep- ing Up a Home , earlier, under Head of Household . Example. Y our spouse died in 2022 and you haven’t remarried. During 2023 and 2024 you continued to keep up a home for you and your child who lives with you and whom you can claim as a dependent. For 2022, you were enti- tled to file a joint return for you and your de- ceased spouse. For 2023 and 2024, you can file as qualifying surviving spouse. After 2024, you can file as head of household if you qualify. Death or birth. Y ou may be eligible to file as a qualifying surviving spouse if the child who qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies during the year. Y ou must have provided more than half of the cost of keeping up a home that was the child's main home during the entire part of the year the child was alive. Adopted child. Y ou may be eligible to file as a qualifying surviving spouse if the child who qualifies you for this filing status you adopted in 2024 or was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption by you in 2024. The child is consid- ered to have lived with you for all of 2024 if your main home was this child’s main home for the entire time since this child was adopted or placed with you in 2024. Kidnapped child. Y ou may be eligible to file as a qualifying surviving spouse even if the child who qualifies you for this filing status has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for more information.As mentioned earlier, the filing status qualifying surviving spouse is available for only 2 years following the year your spouse died. CAUTION!Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1 Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status. IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . . qualifying child (such as a son, daughter, or grandchild who lived with you more than half the year and meets certain other tests)2the child is single a qualifying person, whether or not the child meets the Citizen or Resident T est in chapter 3. the child is married and you can claim the child as a dependenta qualifying person. the child is married and you can’t claim the child as a dependentnot a qualifying person.3 qualifying relative4 who is your father or motheryou can claim your parent as a dependent5a qualifying person.6 you can’t claim your parent as a dependent not a qualifying person. qualifying relative4 other than your father or mother (such as a grandparent, brother, or sister who meets certain tests)your relative lived with you more than half the year, and your relative is related to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live with you in chapter 3 and you can claim your relative as a dependent5a qualifying person. your relative didn't live with you more than half the yearnot a qualifying person. your relative isn't related to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live with you in chapter 3 and is your qualifying relative only because your relative lived with you all year as a member of your householdnot a qualifying person. you can’t claim your relative as a dependent not a qualifying person. 1 A person can’t qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year. 2 The term “ qualifying child ” is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of household filing status doesn't include a child who is your qualifying child only because of the rules described under Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child is generally your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child isn't a qualifying child you can claim as a dependent. 3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can’t claim the person as a dependent is that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer’s return. 4 The term “ qualifying relative ” is defined in chapter 3. 5 If you can claim a person as a dependent only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn't a qualifying person. See Multiple Support Agreement in chapter 3. 6 See Special rule for parent under Qualifying Person , earlier.T able 2-1.Page 28 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 26 Chapter 2 Filing Status Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 29 --- 3. Dependents Introduction This chapter discusses the following topics. •Dependents—Y ou can generally claim your qualifying child or qualifying relative as a dependent. •Social security number (SSN) requirement for dependents—Y ou must list the SSN of any person you claim as a dependent. How to claim dependents. On page 1 of your Form 1040 or 1040- SR, enter the names of your dependents in the Dependents section. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information 503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses 526 Charitable Contributions Form (and Instructions) 2120 Multiple Support Declaration 8332 Release/Revocation of Release of Claim to Exemption for Child by Custodial Parent Dependents The term “dependent” means: •A qualifying child, or •A qualifying relative. The terms “ qualifying child ” and “ qualifying relative ” are defined later. All the requirements for claiming a depend- ent are summarized in T able 3 -1. Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If these people work for you, you can’t claim them as dependents. Child tax credit. Y ou may be entitled to a child tax credit for each qualifying child who was un- der age 17 at the end of the year if you claimed that child as a dependent. For more information, see chapter 14 . Credit for other dependents. Y ou may be en- titled to a credit for other dependents for each qualifying child who does not qualify you for the child tax credit and for each qualifying relative. For more information, see chapter 14 . Exceptions Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying relative, you can claim that person as a dependent only if these three tests are met. 501 503 526 2120 83321.Dependent taxpayer test . 2.Joint return test . 3.Citizen or resident test . These three tests are explained in detail here. Dependent Taxpayer Test If you can be claimed as a dependent by an- other taxpayer, you can’t claim anyone else as a dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying relative, you can’t claim that person as a dependent. If you are filing a joint return and your spouse can be claimed as a dependent by an- other taxpayer, you and your spouse can’t claim any dependents on your joint return. Exception. If you can be claimed as a depend- ent by another taxpayer, you can claim some- one else as a dependent if the person who can claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent files a return only to claim a re- fund of income tax withheld or estimated tax paid. Joint Return Test Y ou generally can’t claim a married person as a dependent if that person files a joint return. Exception. Y ou can claim a person as a de- pendent who files a joint return if that person and that person’s spouse file the joint return only to claim a refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax paid. Example 1 —Child files joint return. Y ou supported your 18 -year- old child who lived with you all year while your child’s spouse was in the Armed Forces. Y our child’s spouse earned $35,000 for the year. The couple files a joint re- turn. Y ou can’t claim your child as a dependent. Example 2 —Child files joint return only as claim for refund of withheld tax. Y our 18-year- old child and your child’s 17 -year-old spouse had $800 of wages from part -time jobs and no other income. They lived with you all year. Neither is required to file a tax return. They don’t have a child. T axes were taken out of their pay, so they filed a joint return only to get a re- fund of the withheld taxes. The exception to the joint return test applies, so you aren't disquali- fied from claiming each of them as a dependent just because they file a joint return. Y ou can claim each of them as a dependent if all the other tests to do so are met. Example 3 —Child files joint return to claim American opportunity credit. The facts are the same as in Example 2 , except no taxes were taken out of your child’s pay or your child’s spouse’s pay. However, they file a joint return to claim an American opportunity credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount. Be- cause they filed a joint return claiming the American opportunity credit, they aren't filing it only to get a refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint re- turn test doesn't apply, so you can’t claim either of them as a dependent.Citizen or Resident Test Y ou generally can’t claim a person as a depend- ent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. res- ident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Can- ada or Mexico. However, there is an exception for certain adopted children, as explained next. Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally adopted a child who isn't a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if the child lived with you as a member of your household all year. This exception also applies if the child was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption and the child lived with you for the rest of the year after placement. Child's place of residence. Children are usu- ally citizens or residents of the country of their parents. If you were a U.S. citizen when your child was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and meet this test even if the other parent was a nonresident alien and the child was born in a foreign country. Foreign students' place of residence. For- eign students brought to this country under a qualified international education exchange pro- gram and placed in American homes for a tem- porary period generally aren't U.S. residents and don’t meet this test. Y ou can’t claim them as dependents. However, if you provided a home for a foreign student, you may be able to take a charitable contribution deduction. See Expenses Paid for Student Living With Y ou in Pub. 526. U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes their alle- giance to the United States. U.S. nationals in- clude American Samoans and Northern Ma- riana Islanders who chose to become U.S. nationals instead of U.S. citizens. Qualifying Child Five tests must be met for a child to be your qualifying child. The five tests are: 1.Relationship , 2.Age, 3.Residency , 4.Support , and 5.Joint return . These tests are explained next. If a child meets the five tests to be the qualifying child of more than one per- son, there are rules you must use to determine which person can actually treat the child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person , later. Relationship Test T o meet this test, a child must be: •Y our son, daughter, stepchild, or foster child, or a descendant (for example, your grandchild) of any of them; or •Y our brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsister, or a descendant CAUTION!Page 29 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 3 Dependents 27 --- Page 30 --- (for example, your niece or nephew) of any of them. Adopted child. An adopted child is always treated as your own child. The term “adopted child” includes a child who was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption. Foster child. A foster child is an individual who is placed with you by an authorized placement agency or by judgment, decree, or other order of any court of competent jurisdiction.Age Test T o meet this test, a child must be: •Under age 19 at the end of the year and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); •A student under age 24 at the end of the year and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); or •Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year, regardless of age.Example. Y our child turned 19 on Decem- ber 10. Unless this child was permanently and totally disabled or a student, this child doesn't meet the age test because, at the end of the year, this child wasn't under age 19. Child must be younger than you or spouse. T o be your qualifying child, a child who isn't per- manently and totally disabled must be younger than you. However, if you are married filing jointly, the child must be younger than you or your spouse but doesn't have to be younger than both of you.Overview of the Rules for Claiming a Dependent Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter. •Y ou can’t claim any dependents if you (or your spouse if filing jointly) could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer, unless that taxpayer files a return only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. •Y ou can’t claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. •Y ou can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or Mexico.1 •Y ou can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative. Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative 1.The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any of them. 2.The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); (b) under age 24 at the end of the year, a student, and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); or (c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 3.The child must have lived with you for more than half of the year.2 4.The child must not have provided more than half of the child’s own support for the year. 5.The child must not be filing a joint return for the year (unless that joint return is filed only to get a refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax paid). If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one person, generally only one person can actually treat the child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person , later, to find out which person is the person entitled to claim the child as a qualifying child.1.The person can’t be your qualifying child or the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. 2.The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live with you , or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your household2 (and your relationship must not violate local law). 3.The person's gross income for the year must be less than $5,050.3 4.Y ou must provide more than half of the person's total support for the year.4 1 There is an exception for certain adopted children . 2 There are exceptions for temporary absences , children who were born or died during the year , children who were adopted or lawfully placed for adoption during the year, children who are eligible foster children placed during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) , and kidnapped children . 3 There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop . 4 There are exceptions for multiple support agreements , children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) , and kidnapped children .T able 3-1.Page 30 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 28 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 31 --- Example 1 —Child not younger than you or spouse. Y our 23 -year- old sibling, who is a student and unmarried, lives with you and your spouse, who provide more than half of your sib- ling’s support. Y our sibling isn't disabled. Both you and your spouse are 21 years old, and you file a joint return. Y our sibling isn't your qualify- ing child because your sibling isn't younger than you or your spouse. Example 2 —Child younger than your spouse but not younger than you. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except your spouse is 25 years old. Because your sibling is younger than your spouse, and you and your spouse are filing a joint return, your sibling is your qualifying child, even though your sibling isn't younger than you. Student defined. T o qualify as a student, your child must be, during some part of each of any 5 calendar months of the year: 1.A full-time student at a school that has a regular teaching staff and course of study, and a regularly enrolled student body at the school; or 2.A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- ing course given by a school described in (1), or by a state, county, or local govern- ment agency. The 5 calendar months don’t have to be con- secutive. Full- time student. A full -time student is a student who is enrolled for the number of hours or courses the school considers to be full -time attendance. School defined. A school can be an ele- mentary school; a junior or senior high school; a college; a university; or a technical, trade, or mechanical school. However, an on -the-job training course, correspondence school, or school offering courses only through the Inter- net doesn’t count as a school. Vocational high school students. Stu- dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus- try as a part of a school's regular course of classroom and practical training are considered full-time students. Permanently and totally disabled. Y our child is permanently and totally disabled if both of the following apply. •Y our child can’t engage in any substantial gainful activity because of a physical or mental condition. •A doctor determines the condition has las- ted or can be expected to last continuously for at least a year or can lead to death. Residency Test T o meet this test, your child must have lived with you for more than half the year. There are ex- ceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, adopted or foster children, kidnapped children, and chil- dren of divorced or separated parents. Temporary absences. Y our child is consid- ered to have lived with you during periods of time when one of you, or both, is temporarily absent due to special circumstances such as: •Illness, •Education, •Business, •Vacation, •Military service, or •Detention in a juvenile facility. Death or birth of child. A child who was born or died during the year is treated as having lived with you more than half of the year if your home was the child's home more than half of the time the child was alive during the year. The same is true if the child lived with you more than half the year except for any required hospital stay follow- ing birth. Child born alive. Y ou may be able to claim as a dependent a child born alive during the year, even if the child lived only for a moment. State or local law must treat the child as having been born alive. There must be proof of a live birth shown by an official document, such as a birth certificate. The child must be your qualify- ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other tests to claim the child as a dependent must be met. Stillborn child. Y ou can’t claim a stillborn child as a dependent. Adopted or foster child. Y ou can treat your adopted child or foster child as meeting the res- idency test as follows if you adopted the child in 2024, the child was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption by you in 2024, or the child was an eligible foster child placed with you during 2024. This child is considered to have lived with you for more than half of 2024 if your main home was this child’s main home for more than half the time since this child was adopted or placed with you in 2024. Kidnapped child. Y ou may be able to treat your child as meeting the residency test even if the child has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for details. Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart). In most cases, because of the residency test, a child of di- vorced or separated parents is the qualifying child of the custodial parent. However, the child will be treated as the qualifying child of the non- custodial parent if all four of the following state- ments are true. 1.The parents: a.Are divorced or legally separated un- der a decree of divorce or separate maintenance; b.Are separated under a written separa- tion agreement; or c.Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of the year, whether or not they are or were married. 2.The child received over half of the child’s support for the year from the parents. 3.The child is in the custody of one or both parents for more than half of the year. 4.Either of the following statements is true.a.The custodial parent signs a written declaration, discussed later, that they won't claim the child as a dependent for the year, and the noncustodial pa- rent attaches this written declaration to their return. (If the decree or agree- ment went into effect after 1984 and before 2009, see Post -1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree or separa- tion agreement , later. If the decree or agreement went into effect after 2008, see Post -2008 divorce decree or sep- aration agreement , later.) b.A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- rate maintenance or written separa- tion agreement that applies to 2024 states that the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a dependent, the decree or agreement wasn't changed after 1984 to say the non- custodial parent can’t claim the child as a dependent, and the noncustodial parent provides at least $600 for the child's support during the year. If statements (1) through (4) are all true, only the noncustodial parent can: •Claim the child as a dependent; and •Claim the child as a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the credit for other depend- ents, or the additional child tax credit. However, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to claim head of household filing status, the credit for child and dependent care expen- ses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, or the earned income credit. See Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or separated pa- rents (or parents who live apart) , later. Example— Earned income credit. Even if statements (1) through (4) are all true and the custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substan- tially similar statement that the custodial parent won’t claim the child as a dependent for 2024, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to claim the child as a qualifying child for the earned income credit. The custodial parent or another taxpayer, if eligible, can claim the child for the earned income credit. Custodial parent and noncustodial pa- rent. The custodial parent is the parent with whom the child lived for the greater number of nights during the year. The other parent is the noncustodial parent. If the parents divorced or separated during the year and the child lived with both parents before the separation, the custodial parent is the one with whom the child lived for the greater number of nights during the rest of the year. A child is treated as living with a parent for a night if the child sleeps: •At that parent's home, whether or not the parent is present; or •In the company of the parent, when the child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for example, the parent and child are on vaca- tion together). Equal number of nights. If the child lived with each parent for an equal number of nights during the year, the custodial parent is the pa- rent with the higher AGI.Page 31 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 3 Dependents 29 --- Page 32 --- December 31. The night of December 31 is treated as part of the year in which the night be- gins. For example, the night of December 31, 2024, is treated as part of 2024. Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa- ted under state law, the child is treated as not living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6. Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa- rent on a particular night (because, for example, the child was staying at a friend's house), the child is treated as living with the parent with whom the child normally would have lived for that night, except for the absence. But if it can’t be determined with which parent the child nor- mally would have lived or if the child wouldn’t have lived with either parent that night, the child is treated as not living with either parent that night. Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a greater number of days, but not nights, with the parent who works at night, that parent is treated as the custodial parent. On a school day, the child is treated as living at the primary resi- dence registered with the school. Example 1 —Child lived with one parent for a greater number of nights. Y ou and your child’s other parent are divorced. In 2024, your child lived with you 210 nights and with the other parent 156 nights. Y ou are the custodial parent. Example 2 —Child is away at camp. In 2024, your child lives with each parent for alter- nate weeks. In the summer, your child spends 6 weeks at summer camp. During those 6 weeks, your child is treated as living with you for 3 weeks and with your child’s other parent, your ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how long the child would have lived with each parent if the child had not attended summer camp. Example 3 —Child lived same number of nights with each parent. Y our child lived with you 180 nights during the year and lived the same number of nights with the child’s other pa- rent, your ex -spouse. Y our AGI is $40,000. Y our ex-spouse's AGI is $25,000. Y ou are treated as your child's custodial parent because you have the higher AGI. Example 4 —Child is at parent’s home but with other parent. Y our child normally lives with you during the week and with the child’s other parent, your ex-spouse, every other weekend. Y ou become ill and are hospitalized. Y our ex -spouse lives in your home with your child for 10 consecutive days while you are in the hospital. Y our child is treated as living with you during this 10 -day period because your child was living in your home. Example 5 —Child emancipated in May. Y our child turned 18 in May 2024 and became emancipated under the law of the state where your child lives. As a result, your child isn't con- sidered in the custody of either parent for more than half of the year. The special rule for chil- dren of divorced or separated parents doesn't apply.Example 6 —Child emancipated in Au- gust. Y our child lives with you from January 1, 2024, until May 31, 2024, and lives with the child’s other parent, your ex -spouse, from June 1, 2024, through the end of the year. Y our child turns 18 and is emancipated under state law on August 1, 2024. Because your child is treated as not living with either parent beginning on Au- gust 1, your child is treated as living with you the greater number of nights in 2024. Y ou are the custodial parent. Written declaration. The custodial parent must use either Form 8332 or a similar state- ment (containing the same information required by the form) to make the written declaration to release a claim to an exemption for a child to the noncustodial parent. Although the exemp- tion amount is zero for tax year 2024, this re- lease allows the noncustodial parent to claim the child tax credit, additional child tax credit, and credit for other dependents, if applicable, for the child. The noncustodial parent must at- tach a copy of the form or statement to their tax return. The release can be for 1 year, for a number of specified years (for example, alternate years), or for all future years, as specified in the declaration. Post- 1984 and pre -2009 divorce decree or separation agreement. If the divorce de- cree or separation agreement went into effect after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent may be able to attach certain pages from the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. The decree or agreement must state all three of the following. 1.The noncustodial parent can claim the child as a dependent without regard to any condition, such as payment of support. 2.The custodial parent won't claim the child as a dependent for the year. 3.The years for which the noncustodial pa- rent, rather than the custodial parent, can claim the child as a dependent. The noncustodial parent must attach all of the following pages of the decree or agreement to their tax return. •The cover page (write the other parent's SSN on this page). •The pages that include all of the informa- tion identified in items (1) through (3) above. •The signature page with the other parent's signature and the date of the agreement. Post- 2008 divorce decree or separation agreement. The noncustodial parent can’t at- tach pages from the decree or agreement in- stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state- ment whose only purpose is to release the cus- todial parent's claim to an exemption for a child, and the noncustodial parent must attach a copy to their return. The form or statement must re- lease the custodial parent's claim to the child without any conditions. For example, the re- lease must not depend on the noncustodial pa- rent paying support.The noncustodial parent must attach the required information even if it was filed with a return in an earlier year. Revocation of release of claim to an ex- emption. The custodial parent can revoke a re- lease of claim to an exemption. For the revoca- tion to be effective for 2024, the custodial parent must have given (or made reasonable efforts to give) written notice of the revocation to the non- custodial parent in 2023 or earlier. The custo- dial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 for this purpose and must attach a copy of the revoca- tion to their return for each tax year the custo- dial parent claims the child as a dependent as a result of the revocation. Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup- port provided by your new spouse is treated as provided by you. Parents who never married. This special rule for divorced or separated parents also ap- plies to parents who never married and who lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of the year. Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Child) T o meet this test, the child can’t have provided more than half of the child’s own support for the year. This test is different from the support test to be a qualifying relative, which is described later. However, to see what is or isn't support, see Support T est (T o Be a Qualifying Relative) , later. If you aren't sure whether a child provided more than half of their own support, you may find Worksheet 3 -1 helpful. Example. Y ou provided $4,000 toward your 16-year- old child's support for the year and the child provided $6,000. Y our child provided more than half their own support. The child isn't your qualifying child. Foster care payments and expenses. Pay- ments you receive for the support of a foster child from a child placement agency are consid- ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, payments you receive for the support of a foster child from a state or county are considered sup- port provided by the state or county. If you aren't in the trade or business of pro- viding foster care and your unreimbursed out-of- pocket expenses in caring for a foster child were mainly to benefit an organization qualified to receive deductible charitable contri- butions, the expenses are deductible as charita- ble contributions but aren't considered support you provided. For more information about the deduction for charitable contributions, see Pub. 526. If your unreimbursed expenses aren't de- ductible as charitable contributions, they may qualify as support you provided. If you are in the trade or business of provid- ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses aren't considered support provided by you. Example 1. A foster child lived with a mar- ried couple, the Smiths, for the last 3 months of the year. The Smiths cared for the foster child because they wanted to adopt the child (al- though the child had not been placed with them CAUTION!Page 32 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 30 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 33 --- Worksheet for Determining Support Worksheet 3-1. Keep for Y our Records Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported 1.Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other accounts at the beginning of the year. Don’t include funds provided by the state; include those amounts on line 23 instead ........................................................ 1. 2.Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ........................ 2. 3.Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................. 3. 4.Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ...... 4. 5.Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................... 5. Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived) 6.Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b): a. Enter the total rent paid ......................................................... 6a. b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, also include this amount in line 21 ................................................ 6b. 7.Enter the total food expenses ...................................................... 7. 8.Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc., not included in line 6a or 6b) ........ 8. 9.Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................... 9. 10. Enter the total of other expenses. Don’t include expenses of maintaining the home, such as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance .................................... 10. 11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ........................ 11. 12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ............................... 12. Expenses for the Person You Supported 13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............. 13. 14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ............................................ 14. 15. Enter the person's total education expenses .......................................... 15. 16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance ...................................................................... 16. 17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................. 17. 18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ......................................... 18. 19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ........... 19. Did the Person Provide More Than Half of the Person’s Own Support? 20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (0.50) ...................................................... 20. 21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned the home. This is the amount the person provided for their own support .................... 21. 22. Is line 21 more than line 20? No. Y ou meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a qualifying child, stop here; don’t complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to determine if this person is your qualifying relative. Yes. Y ou don’t meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop here. Did You Provide More Than Half? 23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Don’t include any amounts included on line 1 .......................................................................... 23. 24. Add lines 21 and 23 .............................................................. 24. 25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ....... 25. 26. Is line 25 more than line 20? Yes. Y ou meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. No. Y ou don’t meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. Y ou can’t claim this person as a dependent unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement or Support T est for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) , or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative .Page 33 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 3 Dependents 31 --- Page 34 --- for adoption). They didn't care for the foster child as a trade or business or to benefit the agency that placed the foster child in their home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses aren't deductible as charitable contributions but are considered support they provided for the foster child. Example 2. Y ou provided $3,000 toward your 10 -year- old foster child's support for the year. The state government provided $4,000, which is considered support provided by the state, not by the child. See Support provided by the state (welfare, food stamps, housing, etc.) , later. Y our foster child didn't provide more than half of their own support for the year. Scholarships. A scholarship received by a child who is a student isn't taken into account in determining whether the child provided more than half of their own support. Joint Return Test (To Be a Qualifying Child) T o meet this test, the child can’t file a joint return for the year. Exception. An exception to the joint return test applies if your child and the child’s spouse file a joint return only to claim a refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax paid. Example 1 —Child files joint return. Y ou supported your 18 -year- old child who lived with you all year while your child’s spouse was in the Armed Forces. Y our child’s spouse earned $35,000 for the year. The couple files a joint re- turn so this child isn't your qualifying child. Example 2 —Child files joint return only as a claim for refund of withheld tax. Y our 18-year- old child and your child’s 17 -year-old spouse had $800 of wages from part -time jobs and no other income. They lived with you all year. Neither is required to file a tax return. They don’t have a child. T axes were taken out of their pay so they filed a joint return only to get a re- fund of the withheld taxes. The exception to the joint return test applies, so this child may be your qualifying child if all the other tests are met. Example 3 —Child files joint return to claim American opportunity credit. The facts are the same as in Example 2 , except no taxes were taken out of either spouse’s pay. However, they file a joint return to claim an American opportunity credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount. Because they filed a joint return claiming the American opportunity credit, they aren’t filing it only to get a refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax paid. The excep- tion to the joint return test doesn't apply, so this child isn't your qualifying child. Qualifying Child of More Than One Person If your qualifying child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else, this topic doesn't apply to you and you don’t need to read about it. This is also true if your qualifying child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else ex- cept your spouse with whom you plan to file a joint return. TIPIf a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) described earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa- rents who live apart) , later. Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, residency, support, and joint return tests to be a qualifying child of more than one person. Although the child is a qualifying child of each of these persons, generally only one person can actually treat the child as a qualifying child to take all of the following tax benefits (provided the person is eligible for each benefit). 1.The child tax credit, credit for other de- pendents, or additional child tax credit. 2.Head of household filing status. 3.The credit for child and dependent care expenses. 4.The exclusion from income for dependent care benefits. 5.The earned income credit. The other person can’t take any of these benefits based on this qualifying child. In other words, you and the other person can’t agree to divide these benefits between you. Tiebreaker rules. T o determine which person can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim these five tax benefits, the following tiebreaker rules apply. For purposes of these tiebreaker rules, the term “parent” means a biological or adoptive parent of an individual. It doesn’t in- clude a stepparent or foster parent unless that person has adopted the individual. •If only one of the persons is the child's pa- rent, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the parent. •If the parents file a joint return together and can claim the child as a qualifying child, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the parents. •If the parents don’t file a joint return to- gether but both parents claim the child as a qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child as the qualifying child of the parent with whom the child lived for the longer period of time during the year. If the child lived with each parent for the same amount of time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual- ifying child of the parent who had the higher AGI for the year. •If no parent can claim the child as a qualify- ing child, the child is treated as the qualify- ing child of the person who had the highest AGI for the year. •If a parent can claim the child as a qualify- ing child but no parent does so claim the child, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person who had the highest AGI for the year, but only if that person's AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of the child's parents who can claim the child. Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the other person may be able to choose which of you claims the child as a qualifying child. CAUTION!Y ou may be able to qualify for the earned income credit under the rules for taxpayers without a qualifying child if you have a qualifying child for the earned in- come credit who is claimed as a qualifying child by another taxpayer. For more information, see Pub. 596. Example 1 —Child lived with parent and grandparent. Y ou and your 3 -year- old child Jordan lived with your parent all year. Y ou are 25 years old and unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Y our parent's AGI is $15,000. Y our child’s other parent didn't live with you or your child. Y ou haven't signed Form 8332 (or a simi- lar statement). Jordan is a qualifying child of both you and your parent because Jordan meets the relation- ship, age, residency, support, and joint return tests for both you and your parent. However, only one of you can claim Jordan. Y our child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else, including Jordan’s other parent. Y ou agree to let your pa- rent claim Jordan. This means your parent can claim Jordan as a qualifying child for all of the five tax benefits listed earlier, if your parent qualifies for each of those benefits (and if you don’t claim Jordan as a qualifying child for any of those tax benefits). Example 2 —Parent has higher AGI than grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex- ample 1 , except your AGI is $18,000. Because your parent's AGI isn't higher than yours, your parent can’t claim Jordan. Only you can claim Jordan. Example 3 —Two persons claim same child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except you and your parent both claim Jordan as a qualifying child. In this case, you, as the child's parent, will be the only one allowed to claim the child as a qualifying child. The IRS will disallow your parent's claim to the five tax bene- fits listed earlier based on Jordan. However, your parent may qualify for the earned income credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying child. Example 4 —Qualifying children split be- tween two persons. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except you also have two other young children who are qualifying children of both you and your parent. Only one of you can claim each child. However, if your parent's AGI is higher than yours, you can allow your parent to claim one or more of the children. For exam- ple, if you claim one child, your parent can claim the other two. Example 5 —Taxpayer who is a qualify- ing child. The facts are the same as in Exam- ple 1 , except you are only 18 years old and didn't provide more than half of your own sup- port for the year. This means you are your pa- rent's qualifying child. If your parent can claim you as a dependent, then you can’t claim your child as a dependent because of the Depend- ent T axpayer T est , explained earlier, unless your parent files a return only to claim a refund of in- come tax withheld or estimated tax paid. Example 6 —Separated parents. Y ou, your spouse, and your 10 -year- old child all lived in the United States for all of 2024. On August TIPPage 34 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 32 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 35 --- 1, 2024, your spouse moved out of the house- hold. In August and September, your child lived with you. For the rest of the year, your child lived with your spouse, the child's other parent. Y our child is a qualifying child of both you and your spouse because your child lived with each of you for more than half the year and because your child met the relationship, age, support, and joint return tests for both of you. At the end of the year, you and your spouse still weren't di- vorced, legally separated, or separated under a written separation agreement, so the rule for children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) doesn't apply. Y ou and your spouse will file separate re- turns. Y our spouse agrees to let you treat your child as a qualifying child. This means, if your spouse doesn't claim your child as a qualifying child, you can claim this child as a qualifying child for the child tax credit and exclusion for dependent care benefits (if you qualify for each of those tax benefits). However, you can’t claim head of household filing status because you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of the year. As a result, your filing status is married filing separately, so you can’t claim the earned income credit because you don’t meet the requirements for certain separated spouses to claim the earned income credit when they don’t file a joint return. Y ou and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024, and while you did live apart at the end of 2024, you aren't legally separated under a writ- ten separation agreement or decree of separate maintenance. Therefore, you don't meet the re- quirements to take the earned income credit as a separated spouse who is not filing a joint re- turn. Y ou also can't take the credit for child and dependent care expenses because your filing status is married filing separately and you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024. Example 7 —Separated parents claim same child. The facts are the same as in Ex- ample 6 , except you and your spouse both claim your child as a qualifying child. In this case, only your spouse will be allowed to treat your child as a qualifying child. This is because, during 2024, the child lived with your spouse longer than with you. If you claimed the child tax credit for your child, the IRS will disallow your claim to the child tax credit. If you don’t have an- other qualifying child or dependent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to the exclusion for de- pendent care benefits. In addition, because you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of the year, your spouse can’t claim head of household filing status. As a result, your spouse’s filing status is married filing separately. Y our spouse can’t claim the earned income credit because your spouse doesn’t meet the requirements to claim the earned income credit - for certain separated spouses. Y ou and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024, and, while you did live apart at the end of 2024, you aren't legally separated under a writ- ten separation agreement or decree of separate maintenance. Therefore, your spouse doesn't meet the requirements to take the earned in- come credit as a separated spouse who isn’t fil- ing a joint return. Y our spouse also can't take the credit for child and dependent care expen- ses because your spouse’s filing status is married filing separately and you and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2024. Example 8 —Unmarried parents. Y ou, your 5-year- old child, Marley, and Marley’s other parent lived together in the United States all year. Y ou and Marley’s other parent aren't mar- ried. Marley is a qualifying child of both you and the other parent because Marley meets the rela- tionship, age, residency, support, and joint re- turn tests for both you and the other parent. Y our AGI is $12,000 and the other parent’s AGI is $14,000. The other parent agrees to let you claim Marley as a qualifying child. This means you can claim Marley as a qualifying child for the child tax credit, head of household filing sta- tus, the credit for child and dependent care ex- penses, the exclusion for dependent care bene- fits, and the earned income credit, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits (and if the other parent doesn't claim Marley as a qualifying child for any of those tax benefits). Example 9 —Unmarried parents claim same child. The facts are the same as in Ex- ample 8 , except you and Marley’s other parent both claim Marley as a qualifying child. In this case, only the other parent will be allowed to treat Marley as a qualifying child. This is be- cause the other parent’s AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, $12,000. If you claimed the child tax credit for Marley, the IRS will disallow your claim to this credit. If you don’t have another qualifying child or dependent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to head of household filing status, the credit for child and dependent care expenses, and the exclusion for dependent care benefits. However, you may be able to claim the earned income credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying child. Example 10 —Child didn't live with a pa- rent. Y ou and your sibling’s child, Reid, lived with your parent all year. Y ou are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Y our parent’s AGI is $15,000. Reid’s parents file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and don’t live with you or Reid. Reid is a qualifying child of both you and your parent because Reid meets the relation- ship, age, residency, support, and joint return tests for both you and your parent. However, only your parent can treat Reid as a qualifying child. This is because your parent’s AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent under the rules described earlier for children of divorced or sep- arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a dependent and claim the child tax credit, addi- tional child tax credit, or credit for other depend- ents for the child. However, only the custodial parent can claim the credit for child and de- pendent care expenses or the exclusion for de- pendent care benefits for the child. Also, gener- ally, the noncustodial parent can't claim the child as a qualifying child for head of household filing status or the earned income credit. In- stead, generally, the custodial parent, if eligible, or other eligible person can claim the child as a qualifying child for those two benefits. If the child is the qualifying child of more than one person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker rules just explained determine whether the cus- todial parent or another eligible person can treat the child as a qualifying child. Example 1. Y ou and your 5 -year- old child, Kody, lived all year with your parent in the Uni- ted States. Y our parent paid the entire cost of keeping up the home. Y our AGI is $10,000. Y our parent's AGI is $25,000. Kody’s other parent lived in the United States all year, but didn’t live with you or Kody. Under the rules explained earlier for children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), Kody is treated as the qualifying child of Kody’s other parent, who can claim the child tax credit for the child. Because of this, you can’t claim the child tax credit for your child. However, those rules don't allow Kody’s other parent to claim Kody as a qualifying child for head of household filing status, the credit for child and dependent care expenses, the exclu- sion for dependent care benefits, or the earned income credit. Y ou and your parent didn't have any child care expenses or dependent care benefits, so neither of you can claim the credit for child and dependent care expenses or the exclusion for dependent care benefits. But Kody is a qualify- ing child of both you and your parent for head of household filing status and the earned income credit because Kody meets the relationship, age, residency, support, and joint return tests for both you and your parent. (The support test doesn't apply for the earned income credit.) However, you agree to let your parent claim Kody. This means your parent can claim Kody for head of household filing status and the earned income credit if your parent qualifies for each and if you don’t claim Kody as a qualifying child for the earned income credit. (Y ou can’t claim head of household filing status because your parent paid the entire cost of keeping up the home.) Y ou may be able to claim the earned income credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying child. Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except your AGI is $25,000 and your parent's AGI is $21,000. Y our parent can’t claim Kody as a qualifying child for any purpose because your parent’s AGI isn't higher than yours. Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except you and your parent both claim Kody as a qualifying child for the earned income credit. Y our parent also claims Kody as a qualifying child for head of household filing status. Y ou, as the child's parent, will be the only one allowed to claim Kody as a qualifying child for the earned income credit. The IRS will disallow your parent's claim to head of house- hold filing status unless your parent has another qualifying child or dependent. Y our parent can't claim the earned income credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying child because your parent’s AGI is more than $18,591. Qualifying Relative Four tests must be met for a person to be your qualifying relative. The four tests are:Page 35 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 3 Dependents 33 --- Page 36 --- 1.Not a qualifying child test , 2.Member of household or relationship test , 3.Gross income test , and 4.Support test . Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela- tive can be any age. There is no age test for a qualifying relative. Kidnapped child. Y ou may be able to treat a child as your qualifying relative even if the child has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for details. Not a Qualifying Child Test A child isn't your qualifying relative if the child is your qualifying child or the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. Example 1. Y our 22-year- old child, who is a student, lives with you and meets all the tests to be your qualifying child. This child isn't your qualifying relative. Example 2. Y our 2 -year- old child lives with your parents and meets all the tests to be their qualifying child. This child isn't your qualifying relative. Example 3. Y our 30 -year- old child lives with you. This child isn’t a qualifying child be- cause the age test isn’t met. This child may be your qualifying relative if the gross income test and the support test are met. Example 4. Y our 13 -year- old grandchild only lived with you for 5 months during the year. Y our grandchild isn’t your qualifying child be- cause the residency test isn’t met. Y our grand- child may be your qualifying relative if the gross income test and the support test are met. Child of person not required to file a return. A child isn't the qualifying child of any other tax- payer and so may qualify as your qualifying rela- tive if the child's parent (or other person for whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) isn't required to file an income tax return and ei- ther: •Doesn't file an income tax return, or •Files a return only to get a refund of in- come tax withheld or estimated tax paid. Example 1 —Return not required. Y ou support an unrelated friend and your friend’s 3-year- old child, who lived with you all year in your home. Y our friend has no gross income, isn't required to file a 2024 tax return, and doesn't file a 2024 tax return. Both your friend and your friend’s child are your qualifying rela- tives if the support test is met. Example 2 —Return filed to claim refund. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year and had income tax withheld from their wages. Y our friend files a return only to get a refund of the income tax withheld and doesn't claim the earned income credit or any other tax credits or deductions. Both your friend and your friend’s child are your qualifying relatives if the support test is met.Example 3 —Earned income credit claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam- ple 2 , except your friend had wages of $8,000 during the year and claimed the earned income credit. Y our friend's child is the qualifying child of another taxpayer (your friend), so you can’t claim your friend's child as your qualifying rela- tive. Also, you can’t claim your friend as your qualifying relative because of the gross income test, explained later. Child in Canada or Mexico. Y ou may be able to claim your child as a dependent even if the child lives in Canada or Mexico. If the child doesn't live with you, the child doesn't meet the residency test to be your qualifying child. How- ever, the child may still be your qualifying rela- tive. If the persons the child does live with aren't U.S. citizens and have no U.S. gross income, those persons aren't “taxpayers,” so the child isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. If the child isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative as long as the gross income test and the support test are met. Y ou can’t claim as a dependent a child who lives in a foreign country other than Canada or Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex- ception for certain adopted children who lived with you all year. See Citizen or Resident T est , earlier. Example. Y ou provide all the support of your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in Mexico with your parent and have no income. Y ou are single and live in the United States. Y our parent isn't a U.S. citizen and has no U.S. income, so your parent isn't a “taxpayer.” Y our children aren't your qualifying children because they don’t meet the residency test. But since they aren't the qualifying children of any other taxpayer, they may be your qualifying relatives and you may be permitted to claim them as de- pendents. Y ou may also be able to claim your parent as a dependent if the gross income and support tests are met. Member of Household or Relationship Test T o meet this test, a person must either: 1.Live with you all year as a member of your household, or 2.Be related to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live with you below. If at any time during the year the person was your spouse, that person can’t be your qualify- ing relative. Relatives who don’t have to live with you. A person related to you in any of the following ways doesn't have to live with you all year as a member of your household to meet this test. •Y our child, stepchild, or foster child, or a descendant of any of them (for example, your grandchild). (A legally adopted child is considered your child.) •Y our brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsister.•Y our father, mother, grandparent, or other direct ancestor, but not foster parent. •Y our stepfather or stepmother. •A son or daughter of your brother or sister. •A son or daughter of your half brother or half sister. •A brother or sister of your father or mother. •Y our son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa- ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law. Any of these relationships that were established by marriage aren't ended by death or divorce. Example. In 2018, you and your spouse began supporting your spouse’s unmarried pa- rent, Gene. Y our spouse died in 2023. Despite your spouse’s death, Gene continues to meet this test, even if Gene doesn’t live with you. Y ou can claim Gene as a dependent if all other tests are met, including the gross income and sup- port tests. Foster child. A foster child is an individual who is placed with you by an authorized place- ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other order of any court of competent jurisdiction. Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per- son can be related to either you or your spouse. Also, the person doesn't need to be related to the spouse who provides support. For example, you provide more than half the support for your spouse’s stepparent. Y our spouse’s stepparent may be your qualifying rel- ative even if the stepparent doesn't live with you. However, if you and your spouse file sepa- rate returns, your spouse's stepparent can be your qualifying relative only if the stepparent lives with you all year as a member of your household. Temporary absences. A person is considered to live with you as a member of your household during periods of time when one of you, or both, is temporarily absent due to special circumstan- ces such as: •Illness, •Education, •Business, •Vacation, •Military service, or •Detention in a juvenile facility. If the person is placed in a nursing home for an indefinite period of time to receive constant medical care, the absence may be considered temporary. Death or birth. A person who died during the year, but lived with you as a member of your household until death, will meet this test. The same is true for a child who was born during the year and lived with you as a member of your household for the rest of the year. The test is also met if a child lived with you as a member of your household except for any required hospital stay following birth. If your dependent died during the year and you otherwise qualify to claim that person as a dependent, you can still claim that person as a dependent.Page 36 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 34 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 37 --- Example. Y our parent, who met the tests to be your qualifying relative, died on January 15. Y ou can claim your parent as a dependent on your return. Local law violated. A person doesn't meet this test if at any time during the year the rela- tionship between you and that person violates local law. Example. Y our significant other lived with you as a member of your household all year. However, your relationship violated the laws of the state where you live because your signifi- cant other was married to someone else. There- fore, your significant other doesn't meet this test and you can’t claim them as a dependent. Adopted child. An adopted child is always treated as your own child. The term “adopted child” includes a child who was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption. Cousin. Y our cousin must live with you all year as a member of your household to meet this test. A cousin is a descendant of a brother or sister of your father or mother. Gross Income Test T o meet this test, a person's gross income for the year must be less than $5,050. Gross income defined. Gross income is all in- come in the form of money, property, and serv- ices that isn't exempt from tax. In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min- ing business, gross income is the total net sales minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella- neous income from the business. Gross receipts from rental property are gross income. Don’t deduct taxes, repairs, or other expenses to determine the gross income from rental property. Gross income includes a partner's share of the gross (not a share of the net) partnership in- come. Gross income also includes all taxable un- employment compensation, taxable social se- curity benefits, and certain amounts received as scholarship and fellowship grants. Scholarships received by degree candidates and used for tui- tion, fees, supplies, books, and equipment re- quired for particular courses generally aren't in- cluded in gross income. For more information about scholarships, see chapter 8 . Disabled dependent working at sheltered workshop. For purposes of the gross income test, the gross income of an individual who is permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year doesn't include income for serv- ices the individual performs at a sheltered work- shop. The availability of medical care at the workshop must be the main reason for the indi- vidual's presence there. Also, the income must come solely from activities at the workshop that are incident to this medical care. A “sheltered workshop” is a school that: •Provides special instruction or training de- signed to alleviate the disability of the indi- vidual; and•Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi- zations, or by a state, a U.S. territory, a po- litical subdivision of a state or territory, the United States, or the District of Columbia. Permanently and totally disabled has the same meaning here as under Qualifying Child , earlier. Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) T o meet this test, you must generally provide more than half of a person's total support during the calendar year. However, if two or more persons provide support, but no one person provides more than half of a person's total support, see Multiple Support Agreement , later. How to determine if support test is met. Y ou figure whether you have provided more than half of a person's total support by compar- ing the amount you contributed to that person's support with the entire amount of support that person received from all sources. This includes support the person provided from the person’s own funds. Y ou may find Worksheet 3 -1 helpful in figur- ing whether you provided more than half of a person's support. Person's own funds not used for support. A person's own funds aren't support unless they are actually spent for support. Example. Y our parent received $2,400 in social security benefits and $300 in interest, paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation, and put $300 in a savings account. Even though your parent received a total of $2,700 ($2,400 + $300), your parent spent only $2,400 ($2,000 + $400) for your parent’s own support. If you spent more than $2,400 for your parent’s support and no other support was re- ceived, you have provided more than half of your parent’s support. Child's wages used for own support. Y ou can’t include in your contribution to your child's support any support paid for by the child with the child's own wages, even if you paid the wa- ges. Year support is provided. The year you pro- vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if you do so with borrowed money that you repay in a later year. If you use a fiscal year to report your income, you must provide more than half of the depend- ent's support for the calendar year in which your fiscal year begins. Armed Forces dependency allotments. The part of the allotment contributed by the govern- ment and the part taken out of your military pay are both considered provided by you in figuring whether you provide more than half of the sup- port. If your allotment is used to support per- sons other than those you name, you can claim them as dependents if they otherwise qualify. Example. Y ou are in the Armed Forces. Y ou authorize an allotment for your surviving parent that your surviving parent uses to support them- selves and their sibling. If the allotment provides more than half of each person's support, you can claim each of them as a dependent, if they otherwise qualify, even though you authorize the allotment only for your surviving parent. Tax-exempt military quarters allowances. These allowances are treated the same way as dependency allotments in figuring support. The allotment of pay and the tax -exempt basic al- lowance for quarters are both considered as provided by you for support. Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to- tal support, include tax -exempt income, sav- ings, and borrowed amounts used to support that person. T ax -exempt income includes cer- tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, and tax-exempt interest. Example 1. Y ou provide $4,000 toward your parent’s support during the year. Y our pa- rent has earned income of $600, nontaxable so- cial security benefits of $4,800, and tax -exempt interest of $200, all of which your parent uses for self -support. Y ou can’t claim your parent as a dependent because the $4,000 you provide isn’t more than half of your parent’s total support of $9,600 ($4,000 + $600 +$4,800 + $200). Example 2. Y our sibling takes out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay college tuition. Y our sibling is personally responsible for the loan. Y ou provide $2,000 toward their total sup- port. Y ou can’t claim them as a dependent be- cause you provide less than half of their sup- port. Social security benefits. If a married cou- ple receives benefits that are paid by one check made out to both of them, half of the total paid is considered to be for the support of each spouse, unless they can show otherwise. If a child receives social security benefits and uses them toward their own support, the benefits are considered as provided by the child. Support provided by the state (welfare, food stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits provi- ded by the state to a needy person are gener- ally considered support provided by the state. However, payments based on the needs of the recipient won't be considered as used entirely for that person's support if it is shown that part of the payments weren't used for that purpose. TANF and other governmental payments. Under proposed T reasury regulations, if you re- ceived TANF payments or other similar pay- ments and used the payments to support an- other person, those payments are considered support you provided for that person, rather than support provided by the government or other third party. Foster care. Payments you receive for the sup- port of a foster child from a child placement agency are considered support provided by the agency. See Foster care payments and expen- ses, earlier. Home for the aged. If you make a lump -sum advance payment to a home for the aged to take care of your relative for life and the pay- ment is based on that person's life expectancy, the amount of support you provide each year is Page 37 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 3 Dependents 35 --- Page 38 --- the lump -sum payment divided by the relative's life expectancy. The amount of support you pro- vide also includes any other amounts you provi- ded during the year. Total Support T o figure if you provided more than half of a per- son's support, you must first determine the total support provided for that person. T otal support includes amounts spent to provide food, lodg- ing, clothing, education, medical and dental care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne- cessities. Generally, the amount of an item of support is the amount of the expense incurred in provid- ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support is the fair rental value of the lodging. Expenses not directly related to any one member of a household, such as the cost of food for the household, must be divided among the members of the household. Example 1. A married couple lives with their two children and one of their parents. Their parent gets social security benefits of $2,400, which the parent spends for clothing, transpor- tation, and recreation. The parent has no other income. The married couple’s total food ex- pense for the household is $5,200. They pay the parent’s medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair rental value of the lodging pro- vided for the parent is $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar rooming facilities. Figure the parent’s total support as follows. Fair rental value of lodging ......... $ 1,800 Clothing, transportation, and recreation ................. 2,400 Medical expenses ............. 1,200 Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) ....... 1,040 Total support ............... $6,440 The support the married couple provide, $4,040 ($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical ex- penses + $1,040 food), is more than half of the parent's $6,440 total support. Example 2. Y our parents, Aubrey and Bai- ley, live with you, your spouse, and your two children in a house you own. The fair rental value of your parents' share of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), which includes furnishings and utilities. Aubrey receives a non- taxable pension of $4,200, which Aubrey spends equally between Aubrey and Bailey for items of support such as clothing, transporta- tion, and recreation. Y our total food expense for the household is $6,000. Y our heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Bailey has hospital and medical expenses of $600, which you pay dur- ing the year. Figure your parents' total support as follows.Support provided Aubrey Bailey Fair rental value of lodging ... $1,000 $1,000 Pension spent for their support ............ 2,100 2,100 Share of food (1/6 of $6,000) ............ 1,000 1,000 Medical expenses for Bailey .. 600 Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 Y ou must apply the support test separately to each parent. Y ou provide $2,000 ($1,000 lodging + $1,000 food) of Aubrey’s total support of $4,100— less than half. Y ou provide $2,600 to Bailey ($1,000 lodging + $1,000 food + $600 medical)— more than half of Bailey’s total sup- port of $4,700. Y ou meet the support test for Bailey, but not Aubrey. Heat and utility costs are included in the fair rental value of the lodging, so these aren't considered separately. Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, you are considered to provide support equal to the fair rental value of the room, apartment, house, or other shelter in which the person lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al- lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, and for heat and other utilities that are provided. Fair rental value defined. Fair rental value is the amount you could reasonably expect to receive from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in- surance, utilities, and the cost of furniture and appliances. In some cases, fair rental value may be equal to the rent paid. If you provide the total lodging, the amount of support you provide is the fair rental value of the room the person uses, or a share of the fair rental value of the entire dwelling if the person has use of your entire home. If you don’t provide the total lodging, the total fair rental value must be divided depending on how much of the total lodging you provide. If you provide only a part and the person supplies the rest, the fair rental value must be divided between both of you ac- cording to the amount each provides. Example. Y our parents live rent free in a house you own. It has a fair rental value of $5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 for the furniture. This doesn't include heat and utilities. The house is completely furnished with furniture belonging to your parents. Y ou pay $600 for their utility bills. Utilities usually aren't included in rent for houses in the area where your parents live. Therefore, you consider the total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 ($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) of which you are considered to provide $4,200 ($3,600 + $600). Person living in their own home. The total fair rental value of a person's home that the per- son owns is considered support contributed by that person. Living with someone rent free. If you live with a person rent free in that person’s home, you must reduce the amount you provide for support of that person by the fair rental value of lodging the person provides you. Property. Property provided as support is measured by its fair market value. Fair market value is the price that property would sell for on the open market. It is the price that would be agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will- ing seller, with neither being required to act, and both having reasonable knowledge of the rele- vant facts. Capital expenses. Capital items, such as furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a per- son during the year can be included in total sup- port under certain circumstances. The following examples show when a capital item is or isn't support. Example 1. Y ou buy a $200 power lawn mower for your 13 -year- old child. The child is given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be- cause the lawn mower benefits all members of the household, don’t include the cost of the lawn mower in the support of your child. Example 2. Y ou buy a $150 television set as a birthday present for your 12 -year- old child. The television set is placed in your child's bed- room. Y ou can include the cost of the television set in the support of your child. Example 3. Y ou pay $5,000 for a car and register it in your name. Y ou and your 17-year- old child use the car equally. Because you own the car and don’t give it to your child but merely let your child use it, don’t include the cost of the car in your child’s total support. How- ever, you can include in your child's support your out -of-pocket expenses of operating the car for your child’s benefit. Example 4. Y our 17 -year- old child, using personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. Y ou pro- vide the rest of your child's support, $4,000. Be- cause the car is bought and owned by your child, the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be included in your child’s support. Y our child has provided more than half of their own total support of $8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so this child isn't your qualifying child. Y ou didn't pro- vide more than half of the child’s total support, so the child isn't your qualifying relative. Y ou can’t claim this child as a dependent. Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur- ance premiums you pay, including premiums for supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu- ded in the support you provide. Medical insurance benefits. Medical insur- ance benefits, including basic and supplemen- tary Medicare benefits, aren't part of support. Tuition payments and allowances under the GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while they attend school are included in total support. Example. During the year, your child re- ceives $2,200 from the government under the GI Bill. Y our child uses this amount for their edu- cation. Y ou provide the rest of your child’s sup- port, $2,000. Because GI benefits are included in total support, your child’s total support is $4,200 ($2,200 + $2,000). Y ou haven't provided more than half of your child’s support.Page 38 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 36 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 39 --- Childcare expenses. If you pay someone to provide child or dependent care, you can in- clude these payments in the amount you provi- ded for the support of your child or disabled de- pendent, even if you claim a credit for the payments. For information on the credit, see Pub. 503. Other support items. Other items may be considered as support depending on the facts in each case. Don’t Include in Total Support The following items aren't included in total sup- port. 1.Federal, state, and local income taxes paid by persons from their own income. 2.Social security and Medicare taxes paid by persons from their own income. 3.Life insurance premiums. 4.Funeral expenses. 5.Scholarships received by your child if your child is a student. 6.Survivors' and Dependents' Educational Assistance payments used for the support of the child who receives them. Multiple Support Agreement Sometimes no one provides more than half of the support of a person. Instead, two or more persons, each of whom would be able to claim the person as a dependent but for the support test, together provide more than half of the per- son's support. When this happens, you can agree that any one of you who individually provides more than 10% of the person's support, but only one, can claim the person as a dependent. Each of the others must sign a statement agreeing not to claim the person as a dependent for that year. The person who claims the person as a de- pendent must keep these signed statements for their own records. A multiple support declara- tion identifying each of the others who agreed not to claim the person as a dependent must be attached to the return of the person claiming the person as a dependent. Form 2120 can be used for this purpose. Y ou can claim someone as a dependent un- der a multiple support agreement for someone related to you or for someone who lived with you all year as a member of your household. Example 1. Y ou, and your siblings, Sam, Bobbi, and Dani, provide the entire support of your parent for the year. Y ou provide 45%, Sam provides 35%, and Bobbi and Dani each pro- vide 10%. Either you or Sam can claim your pa- rent as a dependent; the one who doesn’t must sign a statement agreeing not to claim your pa- rent as a dependent. The one who claims your parent as a dependent must attach Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to their return and must keep the statement signed by the other for their records. Because neither Bobbi nor Dani pro- vides more than 10% of the support, neither can claim your parent as a dependent and neither has to sign a statement.Example 2. Y ou and your sibling each pro- vide 20% of your parent's support for the year. The remaining 60% of your parent’s support is provided equally by two persons who are unre- lated. Y our parent doesn't live with them. Be- cause more than half of your parent’s support is provided by persons who can’t claim your pa- rent as a dependent, no one can claim your pa- rent as a dependent. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) In most cases, a child of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) will be a qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil- dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa- rents who live apart) under Qualifying Child , earlier. However, if the child doesn't meet the re- quirements to be a qualifying child of either pa- rent, the child may be a qualifying relative of one of the parents. If you think this might apply to you, see Pub. 501. Social Security Numbers (SSNs) for Dependents Y ou must show the SSN of any dependent you list in the Dependents section of your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. If you don’t show the dependent's SSN when required, or if you show an incor- rect SSN, certain tax benefits may be disallowed. No SSN. If a person whom you expect to claim as a dependent on your return doesn't have an SSN, either you or that person should apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security Card, with the Social Security Administration (SSA). Y ou can get Form SS -5 online at SSA.gov/ forms/ss-5.pdf or at your local SSA office. It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN once the SSA has all the information it needs. If you don’t have a required SSN by the filing due date, you can file Form 4868 for an extension of time to file. Born and died in 2024. If your child was born and died in 2024, and you don’t have an SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos- pital records instead. The document must show the child was born alive. If you do this, enter “DIED” in column (2) of the Dependents section of your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Alien or adoptee with no SSN. If your de- pendent doesn't have and can’t get an SSN, you must show the Individual T axpayer Identifi- cation Number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer iden- tification number (ATIN) instead of an SSN. Taxpayer identification numbers for ali- ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi- dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must apply for an ITIN. For details on how to apply, see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual T axpayer Identification Number. CAUTION!Taxpayer identification numbers for adoptees. If you have a child who was placed with you by an authorized placement agency, you may be able to claim the child as a depend- ent. However, if you can’t get an SSN or an ITIN for the child, you must get an ATIN for the child from the IRS. See Form W -7A, Application for T axpayer Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adoptions, for details. 4. Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax What's New for 2025 Tax law changes for 2025. When you figure how much income tax you want withheld from your pay and when you figure your estimated tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2025. For more information, see Pub. 505, T ax With- holding and Estimated T ax. Reminders Estimated tax safe harbor for higher in- come taxpayers. If your 2024 adjusted gross income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if you are married filing a separate return), you must pay the smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2025 or 110% of the tax shown on your 2024 return to avoid an estimated tax penalty. Introduction This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as you earn or receive income during the year. In general, the federal income tax is a pay-as-you- go tax. There are two ways to pay as you go. •Withholding. If you are an employee, your employer probably withholds income tax from your pay. T ax may also be withheld from certain other income, such as pen- sions, bonuses, commissions, and gam- bling winnings. The amount withheld is paid to the IRS in your name. •Estimated tax. If you don't pay your tax through withholding, or don't pay enough tax that way, you may have to pay estima- ted tax. People who are in business for themselves will generally have to pay their tax this way. Also, you may have to pay es- timated tax if you receive income such as dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, and royalties. Estimated tax is used to pay not Page 39 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 37 --- Page 40 --- only income tax, but self-employment tax and alternative minimum tax as well. This chapter explains these methods. In ad- dition, it also explains the following. •Credit for withholding and estimated tax. When you file your 2024 income tax return, take credit for all the income tax withheld from your salary, wages, pen- sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you paid for 2024. Also take credit for any ex- cess social security or railroad retirement tax withheld. See Pub. 505. •Underpayment penalty. If you didn't pay enough tax during the year, either through withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you may have to pay a penalty. In most cases, the IRS can figure this pen- alty for you. See Underpayment Penalty for 2024 at the end of this chapter. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax Form (and Instructions) W-4 Employee's Withholding Certificate W-4P Withholding Certificate for Periodic Pension or Annuity Payments W-4S Request for Federal Income T ax Withholding From Sick Pay W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request 1040-ES Estimated T ax for Individuals 2210 Underpayment of Estimated T ax by Individuals, Estates, and T rusts 2210-F Underpayment of Estimated T ax by Farmers and Fishers Tax Withholding for 2025 This section discusses income tax withholding on: •Salaries and wages, •Tips, •T axable fringe benefits, •Sick pay, •Pensions and annuities, •Gambling winnings, •Unemployment compensation, and •Certain federal payments. This section explains the rules for withholding tax from each of these types of income. This section also covers backup withholding on interest, dividends, and other payments. Salaries and Wages Income tax is withheld from the pay of most em- ployees. Y our pay includes your regular pay, bo- nuses, commissions, and vacation allowances. 505 W-4 W-4P W-4S W-4V 1040-ES 2210 2210-FIt also includes reimbursements and other ex- pense allowances paid under a nonaccountable plan. See Supplemental Wages , later, for more information about reimbursements and allowan- ces paid under a nonaccountable plan. If your income is low enough that you won't have to pay income tax for the year, you may be exempt from withholding. This is explained un- der Exemption From Withholding , later. Y ou can ask your employer to withhold in- come tax from noncash wages and other wages not subject to withholding. If your employer doesn't agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed later under Estimated T ax for 2025 . Military retirees. Military retirement pay is treated in the same manner as regular pay for income tax withholding purposes, even though it is treated as a pension or annuity for other tax purposes. Household workers. If you are a household worker, you can ask your employer to withhold income tax from your pay. A household worker is an employee who performs household work in a private home, local college club, or local fra- ternity or sorority chapter. T ax is withheld only if you want it withheld and your employer agrees to withhold it. If you don't have enough income tax withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed later under Estimated T ax for 2025 . Farmworkers. Generally, income tax is with- held from your cash wages for work on a farm unless your employer does both of these: •Pays you cash wages of less than $150 during the year, and •Has expenditures for agricultural labor to- taling less than $2,500 during the year. Differential wage payments. When employ- ees are on leave from employment for military duty, some employers make up the difference between the military pay and civilian pay. Pay- ments to an employee who is on active duty for a period of more than 30 days will be subject to income tax withholding, but not subject to social security, Medicare, or federal unemployment (FUTA) tax withholding. The wages and with- holding will be reported on Form W -2, Wage and T ax Statement. Determining Amount of Tax Withheld Using Form W-4 The amount of income tax your employer with- holds from your regular pay depends on two things. •The amount you earn in each payroll pe- riod. •The information you give your employer on Form W-4. Form W -4 includes steps to help you figure your withholding. Complete Steps 2 through 4 only if they apply to you. •Step 1. Enter your personal information in- cluding your filing status. •Step 2. Complete this step if you have more than one job at the same time or are married filing jointly and you and your spouse both work.•Step 3. Complete this step if you claim de- pendents and other credits. •Step 4. Complete this optional step to make other adjustments. *Other income *Deductions *Extra withholding New Job When you start a new job, you must fill out Form W-4 and give it to your employer. Y our employer should have copies of the form. If you need to change the information later, you must fill out a new form. If you work only part of the year (for exam- ple, you start working after the beginning of the year), too much tax may be withheld. Y ou may be able to avoid overwithholding if your em- ployer agrees to use the part -year method. See Part- Y ear Method in chapter 1 of Pub. 505 for more information. Employee also receiving pension income. If you receive pension or annuity income and begin a new job, you will need to file Form W -4 with your new employer. However, you can choose to split your withholding between your pension and job in any manner. Changing Your Withholding During the year, changes may occur to your marital status, adjustments, deductions, or credits you expect to claim on your tax return. When this happens, you may need to give your employer a new Form W -4 to change your with- holding status. If a change in personal circumstances re- duces the amount of withholding you are enti- tled to claim, you are required to give your em- ployer a new Form W -4 within 10 days after the change occurs. Changing your withholding for 2026. If events in 2025 will change the amount of with- holding you should claim for 2026, you must give your employer a new Form W -4 by Decem- ber 1, 2025. If the event occurs in December 2025, submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days. Checking Your Withholding After you have given your employer a Form W-4, you can check to see whether the amount of tax withheld from your pay is too little or too much. If too much or too little tax is being with- held, you should give your employer a new Form W -4 to change your withholding. Y ou should try to have your withholding match your actual tax liability. If not enough tax is withheld, you will owe tax at the end of the year and may have to pay interest and a penalty. If too much tax is withheld, you will lose the use of that money until you get your refund. Always check your withholding if there are personal or finan- cial changes in your life or changes in the law that might change your tax liability. Note. Y ou can’t give your employer a pay- ment to cover withholding on salaries and wa- ges for past pay periods or a payment for esti- mated tax.Page 40 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 41 --- Completing Form W-4 and Worksheets Form W- 4 has worksheets to help you figure the correct amount of withholding you can claim. The worksheets are for your own records. Don't give them to your employer. Multiple Jobs Worksheet. If you have income from more than one job at the same time, or are married filing jointly and you and your spouse both work, complete the Multiple Jobs Work- sheet on the Form W-4. If you and your spouse expect to file sepa- rate returns, figure your withholding using sepa- rate worksheets based on your own individual income, adjustments, deductions, and credits. Deductions Worksheet. Use the Deductions Worksheet on Form W -4 if you plan to itemize deductions or claim certain adjustments to in- come and you want to reduce your withholding. Also complete this worksheet when you have changes to these items to see if you need to change your withholding. Getting the Right Amount of Tax Withheld In most situations, the tax withheld from your pay will be close to the tax you figure on your re- turn if you follow these two rules. •Y ou accurately complete all the Form W-4 worksheets that apply to you. •Y ou give your employer a new Form W-4 when changes occur. But because the worksheets and withhold- ing methods don't account for all possible situa- tions, you may not be getting the right amount withheld. This is most likely to happen in the fol- lowing situations. •Y ou are married and both you and your spouse work. •Y ou have more than one job at a time. •Y ou have nonwage income, such as inter- est, dividends, alimony, unemployment compensation, or self-employment in- come. •Y ou will owe additional amounts with your return, such as self-employment tax. •Y our withholding is based on obsolete Form W-4 information for a substantial part of the year. •Y ou work only part of the year. •Y ou change the amount of your withholding during the year. •Y ou are subject to Additional Medicare T ax or Net Investment Income T ax (NIIT). If you anticipate liability for Additional Medicare T ax or NIIT , you may request that your em- ployer withhold an additional amount of in- come tax withholding on Form W-4. Cumulative wage method. If you change the amount of your withholding during the year, too much or too little tax may have been withheld for the period before you made the change. Y ou may be able to compensate for this if your em- ployer agrees to use the cumulative wage with- holding method for the rest of the year. Y ou must ask your employer in writing to use this method.T o be eligible, you must have been paid for the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi- weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year. Publication 505 T o make sure you are getting the right amount of tax withheld, get Pub. 505. It will help you compare the total tax to be withheld during the year with the tax you can expect to figure on your return. It will also help you determine how much, if any, additional withholding is needed each payday to avoid owing tax when you file your return. If you don't have enough tax with- held, you may have to pay estimated tax, as ex- plained under Estimated T ax for 2025 , later. Y ou can use the T ax Withholding Esti- mator at IRS.gov/W4App , instead of Pub. 505 or the worksheets included with Form W -4, to determine whether you need to have your withholding increased or de- creased. Rules Your Employer Must Follow It may be helpful for you to know some of the withholding rules your employer must follow. These rules can affect how to fill out your Form W-4 and how to handle problems that may arise. New Form W -4. When you start a new job, your employer should have you complete a Form W -4. Beginning with your first payday, your employer will use the information you give on the form to figure your withholding. If you later fill out a new Form W -4, your em- ployer can put it into effect as soon as possible. The deadline for putting it into effect is the start of the first payroll period ending 30 or more days after you turn it in. No Form W -4. If you don't give your employer a completed Form W -4, your employer must withhold at the highest rate, as if you were sin- gle. Repaying withheld tax. If you find you are having too much tax withheld because you didn't claim the correct amount of withholding you are entitled to, you should give your em- ployer a new Form W -4. Y our employer can’t re- pay any of the tax previously withheld. Instead, claim the full amount withheld when you file your tax return. However, if your employer has withheld more than the correct amount of tax for the Form W -4 you have in effect, you don't have to fill out a new Form W -4 to have your withholding lowered to the correct amount. Y our employer can repay the amount that was withheld incor- rectly. If you aren’t repaid, your Form W -2 will reflect the full amount actually withheld, which you would claim when you file your tax return. Exemption From Withholding If you claim exemption from withholding, your employer won't withhold federal income tax from your wages. The exemption applies only to income tax, not to social security, Medicare, or FUTA tax withholding. TIPY ou can claim exemption from withholding for 2025 only if both of the following situations apply. •For 2024, you had a right to a refund of all federal income tax withheld because you had no tax liability. •For 2025, you expect a refund of all federal income tax withheld because you expect to have no tax liability. Students. If you are a student, you aren’t auto- matically exempt. See chapter 1 to find out if you must file a return. If you work only part time or only during the summer, you may qualify for exemption from withholding. Age 65 or older or blind. If you are 65 or older or blind, use Worksheet 1 -1 or 1 -2 in chapter 1 of Pub. 505 to help you decide if you qualify for exemption from withholding. Don't use either worksheet if you will itemize deduc- tions or claim tax credits on your 2025 return. Instead, see Itemizing deductions or claiming credits in chapter 1 of Pub. 505. Claiming exemption from withholding. T o claim exemption, you must give your employer a Form W -4. Write “Exempt” on the form in the space below Step 4(c) and complete the appli- cable steps of the form. If you claim exemption, but later your situa- tion changes so that you will have to pay in- come tax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 within 10 days after the change. If you claim ex- emption in 2025, but you expect to owe income tax for 2026, you must file a new Form W -4 by December 1, 2025. Y our claim of exempt status may be re- viewed by the IRS. An exemption is good for only 1 year. Y ou must give your employer a new Form W -4 by February 15 each year to continue your exemp- tion. Supplemental Wages Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis- sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer- tain sick pay, and expense allowances under certain plans. The payer can figure withholding on supplemental wages using the same method used for your regular wages. However, if these payments are identified separately from your regular wages, your employer or other payer of supplemental wages can withhold income tax from these wages at a flat rate. Expense allowances. Reimbursements or other expense allowances paid by your em- ployer under a nonaccountable plan are treated as supplemental wages. Reimbursements or other expense allowan- ces paid under an accountable plan that are more than your proven expenses are treated as paid under a nonaccountable plan if you don't return the excess payments within a reasonable period of time. For more information about accountable and nonaccountable expense allowance plans, see Pub. 505.Page 41 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 39 --- Page 42 --- Penalties Y ou may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both of the following apply. •Y ou make statements or claim withholding on your Form W-4 that reduce the amount of tax withheld. •Y ou have no reasonable basis for those statements or withholding at the time you prepare your Form W-4. There is also a criminal penalty for willfully supplying false or fraudulent information on your Form W -4 or for willfully failing to supply infor- mation that would increase the amount with- held. The penalty upon conviction can be either a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year, or both. These penalties will apply if you deliberately and knowingly falsify your Form W -4 in an at- tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper with- holding of taxes. A simple error or an honest mistake won't result in one of these penalties. Tips The tips you receive while working on your job are considered part of your pay. Y ou must in- clude your tips on your tax return on the same line as your regular pay. However, tax isn't with- held directly from tip income, as it is from your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer will take into account the tips you report when figur- ing how much to withhold from your regular pay. For more information on reporting your tips to your employer and on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub. 531, Reporting Tip In- come. How employer figures amount to withhold. The tips you report to your employer are coun- ted as part of your income for the month you re- port them. Y our employer can figure your with- holding in either of two ways. •By withholding at the regular rate on the sum of your pay plus your reported tips. •By withholding at the regular rate on your pay plus a percentage of your reported tips. Not enough pay to cover taxes. If your regu- lar pay isn't enough for your employer to with- hold all the tax (including income tax and social security and Medicare taxes (or the equivalent railroad retirement tax)) due on your pay plus your tips, you can give your employer money to cover the shortage. See Pub. 531 for more infor- mation. Allocated tips. Y our employer shouldn't with- hold income tax, Medicare tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allocated tips. Withholding is based only on your pay plus your reported tips. Y our employer should refund to you any incorrectly withheld tax. See Pub. 531 for more information. Taxable Fringe Benefits The value of certain noncash fringe benefits you receive from your employer is considered part of your pay. Y our employer must generally with- hold income tax on these benefits from your regular pay.For information on fringe benefits, see Fringe Benefits under Employee Compensation in chapter 5. Although the value of your personal use of an employer -provided car, truck, or other high- way motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can choose not to withhold income tax on that amount. Y our employer must notify you if this choice is made. For more information on withholding on taxa- ble fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Pub. 505. Sick Pay Sick pay is a payment to you to replace your regular wages while you are temporarily absent from work due to sickness or personal injury. T o qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan to which your employer is a party. If you receive sick pay from your employer or an agent of your employer, income tax must be withheld. An agent who doesn't pay regular wa- ges to you may choose to withhold income tax at a flat rate. However, if you receive sick pay from a third party who isn't acting as an agent of your em- ployer, income tax will be withheld only if you choose to have it withheld. See Form W -4S, later. If you receive payments under a plan in which your employer doesn't participate (such as an accident or health plan where you paid all the premiums), the payments aren’t sick pay and usually aren’t taxable. Union agreements. If you receive sick pay un- der a collective bargaining agreement between your union and your employer, the agreement may determine the amount of income tax with- holding. See your union representative or your employer for more information. Form W -4S. If you choose to have income tax withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, such as an insurance company, you must fill out Form W- 4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet you can use to figure the amount you want with- held. They also explain restrictions that may ap- ply. Give the completed form to the payer of your sick pay. The payer must withhold according to your directions on the form. Estimated tax. If you don't request withholding on Form W -4S, or if you don't have enough tax withheld, you may have to make estimated tax payments. If you don't pay enough tax, either through estimated tax or withholding, or a com- bination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty for 2024 at the end of this chapter. Pensions and Annuities Income tax will usually be withheld from your pension or annuity distributions unless you choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies to distributions from: •A traditional individual retirement arrange- ment (IRA); •A life insurance company under an endow- ment, annuity, or life insurance contract; •A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan;•A stock bonus plan; and •Any other plan that defers the time you re- ceive compensation. The amount withheld depends on whether you receive payments spread out over more than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 year (nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible roll- over distribution (ERD). Income tax withholding from an ERD is mandatory. More information. For more information on withholding on pensions and annuities, includ- ing a discussion of Form W -4P , see Pensions and Annuities in chapter 1 of Pub. 505. Gambling Winnings Income tax is withheld at a flat 24% rate from certain kinds of gambling winnings. Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 from the following sources are subject to in- come tax withholding. •Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, including payments made to winners of poker tour- naments; or lottery. •Any other wager, if the proceeds are at least 300 times the amount of the bet. It doesn't matter whether your winnings are paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Winnings not paid in cash are taken into account at their fair market value. Exception. Gambling winnings from bingo, keno, and slot machines generally aren’t sub- ject to income tax withholding. However, you may need to provide the payer with a social se- curity number to avoid withholding. See Backup withholding on gambling winnings in chapter 1 of Pub. 505. If you receive gambling winnings not subject to withholding, you may need to pay estimated tax. See Estimated T ax for 2025 , later. If you don't pay enough tax, either through withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- derpayment Penalty for 2024 at the end of this chapter. Form W -2G. If a payer withholds income tax from your gambling winnings, you should re- ceive a Form W -2G, Certain Gambling Win- nings, showing the amount you won and the amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25c. Unemployment Compensation Y ou can choose to have income tax withheld from unemployment compensation. T o make this choice, fill out Form W -4V (or a similar form provided by the payer) and give it to the payer. All unemployment compensation is taxable. If you don't have income tax withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated T ax for 2025 , later. If you don't pay enough tax, either through withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- derpayment Penalty for 2024 at the end of this chapter.Page 42 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 43 --- Federal Payments Y ou can choose to have income tax withheld from certain federal payments you receive. These payments are the following. 1.Social security benefits. 2.Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. 3.Commodity credit corporation loans you choose to include in your gross income. 4.Payments under the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et seq.), as amen- ded, or title II of the Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, that are treated as insurance proceeds and that you receive because: a.Y our crops were destroyed or dam- aged by drought, flood, or any other natural disaster; or b.Y ou were unable to plant crops be- cause of a natural disaster described in (a). 5.Any other payment under federal law as determined by the Secretary. T o make this choice, fill out Form W -4V (or a similar form provided by the payer) and give it to the payer. If you don't choose to have income tax with- held, you may have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated T ax for 2025 , later. If you don't pay enough tax, either through withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- derpayment Penalty for 2024 at the end of this chapter. More information. For more information about the tax treatment of social security and railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 7. Get Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide, for information about the tax treatment of commodity credit corpora- tion loans or crop disaster payments. Backup Withholding Banks or other businesses that pay you certain kinds of income must file an information return (Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re- turn shows how much you were paid during the year. It also includes your name and taxpayer identification number (TIN). TINs are explained in chapter 1 under Social Security Number (SSN) . These payments generally aren’t subject to withholding. However, “backup” withholding is required in certain situations. Backup withhold- ing can apply to most kinds of payments that are reported on Form 1099. The payer must withhold at a flat 24% rate in the following situations. •Y ou don't give the payer your TIN in the re- quired manner. •The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN you gave is incorrect. •Y ou are required, but fail, to certify that you aren’t subject to backup withholding. •The IRS notifies the payer to start withhold- ing on interest or dividends because you have underreported interest or dividends on your income tax return. The IRS will do this only after it has mailed you four noti- ces. Go to IRS.gov/Businesses/Small- Businesses-Self-Employed/Backup- Withholding for more information on kinds of payments subject to backup withholding. Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal- ties for giving false information to avoid backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi- nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both. Estimated Tax for 2025 Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax on income that isn't subject to withholding. This in- cludes income from self -employment, interest, dividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of assets, prizes, and awards. Y ou may also have to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax being withheld from your salary, pension, or other income isn't enough. Estimated tax is used to pay both income tax and self -employment tax, as well as other taxes and amounts reported on your tax return. If you don't pay enough tax, either through with- holding or estimated tax, or a combination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. If you don't pay enough by the due date of each payment period (see When T o Pay Estimated T ax , later), you may be charged a penalty even if you are due a refund when you file your tax return. For information on when the penalty applies, see Underpayment Penalty for 2024 at the end of this chapter. Who Doesn't Have To Pay Estimated Tax If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid having to pay estimated tax by asking your em- ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. T o do this, give a new Form W -4 to your employer. See chapter 1 of Pub. 505. Estimated tax not required. Y ou don't have to pay estimated tax for 2025 if you meet all three of the following conditions. •Y ou had no tax liability for 2024. •Y ou were a U.S. citizen or resident alien for the whole year. •Y our 2024 tax year covered a 12-month pe- riod. Y ou had no tax liability for 2024 if your total tax was zero or you didn't have to file an income tax return. For the definition of “total tax” for 2024, see Pub. 505, chapter 2. Who Must Pay Estimated Tax If you owe additional tax for 2024, you may have to pay estimated tax for 2025. Y ou can use the following general rule as a guide during the year to see if you will have enough withholding, or if you should increase your withholding or make estimated tax pay- ments.General rule. In most cases, you must pay es- timated tax for 2025 if both of the following ap- ply. 1.Y ou expect to owe at least $1,000 in tax for 2025, after subtracting your withholding and refundable credits. 2.Y ou expect your withholding plus your re- fundable credits to be less than the smaller of: a.90% of the tax to be shown on your 2025 tax return, or b.100% of the tax shown on your 2024 tax return (but see Special rules for farmers, fishers, and higher income taxpayers , later). Y our 2024 tax return must cover all 12 months. If the result from using the general rule above suggests that you won't have enough withholding, complete the 2025 Estimated T ax Worksheet in Pub. 505 for a more accurate calculation. Special rules for farmers, fishers, and higher income taxpayers. If at least two- thirds of your gross income for tax year 2024 or 2025 is from farming or fishing, substi- tute 662/3% for 90% in (2a) under the General rule, earlier. If your AGI for 2024 was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2025 is married filing a separate return), substitute 110% for 100% in (2b) under General rule , ear- lier. See Figure 4 -A and Pub. 505, chapter 2, for more information. Aliens. Resident and nonresident aliens may also have to pay estimated tax. Resident aliens should follow the rules in this chapter unless no- ted otherwise. Nonresident aliens should get Form 1040 -ES (NR), U.S. Estimated T ax for Nonresident Alien Individuals. Y ou are an alien if you aren’t a citizen or na- tional of the United States. Y ou are a resident alien if you either have a green card or meet the substantial presence test. For more information about the substantial presence test, see Pub. 519, U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens. Married taxpayers. If you qualify to make joint estimated tax payments, apply the rules dis- cussed here to your joint estimated income. Y ou and your spouse can make joint estima- ted tax payments even if you aren’t living to- gether. However, you and your spouse can’t make joint estimated tax payments if: •Y ou are legally separated under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance, •Y ou and your spouse have different tax years, or •Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un- less that spouse elected to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes (see chap- ter 1 of Pub. 519)). If you and your spouse can’t make estimated tax payments, apply these rules to your sepa- rate estimated income. Making joint or separate estimated tax payments won't affect your choice of filing a joint tax return or separate returns for 2025. CAUTION!Page 43 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 41 --- Page 44 --- 2024 separate returns and 2025 joint re- turn. If you plan to file a joint return with your spouse for 2025 but you filed separate returns for 2024, your 2024 tax is the total of the tax shown on your separate returns. Y ou filed a separate return if you filed as single, head of household, or married filing separately. 2024 joint return and 2025 separate re- turns. If you plan to file a separate return for 2025 but you filed a joint return for 2024, your 2024 tax is your share of the tax on the joint re- turn. Y ou file a separate return if you file as sin- gle, head of household, or married filing sepa- rately. T o figure your share of the tax on the joint re- turn, first figure the tax both you and your spouse would have paid had you filed separate returns for 2024 using the same filing status as for 2025. Then, multiply the tax on the joint re- turn by the following fraction. The tax you would have paid had you filed a separate return The total tax you and your spouse would have paid had you filed separate returns Example. T axpayer A and T axpayer B filed a joint return for 2024 showing taxable income of $48,500 and tax of $5,359. Of the $48,500 taxable income, $40,100 was T axpayer A’s and the rest was T axpayer B's. For 2025, they plan to file married filing separately. T axpayer A fig- ures tax on the 2024 joint return as follows.T ax on $40,100 based on a separate return ....... $4,583 T ax on $8,400 based on a separate return ....... 843 T otal ............... $5,426 T axpayer A's percentage of total ($4,583 ÷ $5,426) ... 85% T axpayer A's share of tax on joint return ($5,359 × 85%) ....... $4,555 How To Figure Estimated Tax T o figure your estimated tax, you must figure your expected adjusted gross income (AGI), taxable income, taxes, deductions, and credits for the year. When figuring your 2025 estimated tax, it may be helpful to use your income, deductions, and credits for 2024 as a starting point. Use your 2024 federal tax return as a guide. Y ou can use Form 1040 -ES and Pub. 505 to figure your estimated tax. Nonresident aliens use Form 1040- ES (NR) and Pub. 505 to figure estimated tax (see chapter 8 of Pub. 519 for more informa- tion). Y ou must make adjustments both for changes in your own situation and for recent changes in the tax law. For a discussion of these changes, visit IRS.gov . For more complete information on how to figure your estimated tax for 2025, see chap- ter 2 of Pub. 505.When To Pay Estimated Tax For estimated tax purposes, the tax year is divi- ded into four payment periods. Each period has a specific payment due date. If you don't pay enough tax by the due date of each payment period, you may be charged a penalty even if you are due a refund when you file your income tax return. The payment periods and due dates for estimated tax payments are shown next. For the period: Due date:* Jan. 1–March 31 ...... April 15 April 1–May 31 ....... June 16 June 1–August 31 ..... Sept. 15 Sept. 1–Dec. 31 ...... Jan. 15, next year . *See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule and January payment . Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule. If the due date for an estimated tax payment falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment will be on time if you make it on the next day that isn't a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. January payment. If you file your 2025 Form 1040 or 1040 -SR by February 2, 2026, and pay the rest of the tax you owe, you don't need to make the payment due on January 15, 2026. Fiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year doesn't start on January 1, see the Form 1040 -ES in- structions for your payment due dates.Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax? Start Here NoYes YesNo No YesWill you owe $1,000 or more for 2025 after subtracting income tax withholding and refundable credits* from your total tax? (Don’t subtract any estimated tax payments.)Will your income tax withholding and refundable credits* be at least 90% (662/3% for farmers and /f_ishers) of the tax shown on your 2025 tax return?Will your income tax withholding and refundable credits* be at least 100%** of the tax shown on your 2024 tax return? Note. Your 2024 return must have covered a 12-month period. You are NOT required to pay estimated tax. *Use the refundable credits shown on the 2025 Estimated Tax Worksheet in Pub. 505. **110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2024 and 2025 is from farming or /f_ishing and your 2024 adjusted gross income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if your /f_iling status for 2025 is married /f_iling a separate return).You MUST make estimated tax payment(s) by the required due date(s). See When To Pay Estimated Tax.Page 44 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 45 --- When To Start Y ou don't have to make estimated tax payments until you have income on which you will owe in- come tax. If you have income subject to estima- ted tax during the first payment period, you must make your first payment by the due date for the first payment period. Y ou can pay all your estimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in installments. If you choose to pay in install- ments, make your first payment by the due date for the first payment period. Make your remain- ing installment payments by the due dates for the later periods. No income subject to estimated tax during first period. If you don't have income subject to estimated tax until a later payment period, you must make your first payment by the due date for that period. Y ou can pay your entire es- timated tax by the due date for that period or you can pay it in installments by the due date for that period and the due dates for the remaining periods. General Due Dates for Estimated Tax Installment PaymentsT able 4-1. If you first have income on which you must pay estimated tax:Make installments by:*Make later installments by:* Before April 1 April 15 June 15 Sept. 15 Jan. 15, next year April 1–May 31 June 15 Sept. 15 Jan. 15, next year June 1–Aug. 31 Sept. 15 Jan. 15, next year After Aug. 31 Jan. 15, next year(None) *See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule and January payment . How much to pay to avoid a penalty. T o de- termine how much you should pay by each pay- ment due date, see How T o Figure Each Pay- ment next. How To Figure Each Payment Y ou should pay enough estimated tax by the due date of each payment period to avoid a penalty for that period. Y ou can figure your re- quired payment for each period by using either the regular installment method or the annual- ized income installment method. These meth- ods are described in chapter 2 of Pub. 505. If you don't pay enough during each payment pe- riod, you may be charged a penalty even if you are due a refund when you file your tax return. If the earlier discussion of No income sub- ject to estimated tax during first period or the later discussion of Change in estimated tax ap- plies to you, you may benefit from reading An- nualized Income Installment Method in chap- ter 2 of Pub. 505 for information on how to avoid a penalty. Underpayment penalty. Under the regular in- stallment method, if your estimated tax payment for any period is less than one -fourth of your es- timated tax, you may be charged a penalty for underpayment of estimated tax for that period when you file your tax return. Under the annual- ized income installment method, your estimated tax payments vary with your income, but the amount required must be paid each period. See Instructions for Form 2210 for more information. Change in estimated tax. After you make an estimated tax payment, changes in your in- come, adjustments, deductions, or credits may make it necessary for you to refigure your esti- mated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of your amended estimated tax by the next payment due date after the change or in installments by that date and the due dates for the remaining payment periods. Estimated Tax Payments Not Required Y ou don't have to pay estimated tax if your with- holding in each payment period is at least as much as: •One-fourth of your required annual pay- ment, or •Y our required annualized income install- ment for that period. Y ou also don't have to pay estimated tax if you will pay enough through withholding to keep the amount you owe with your return under $1,000. How To Pay Estimated Tax There are several ways to pay estimated tax. •Credit an overpayment on your 2024 return to your 2025 estimated tax. •Pay by direct transfer from your bank ac- count, or pay by debit or credit card using a pay-by-phone system or the Internet. •Send in your payment (check or money or- der) with a payment voucher from Form 1040-ES. Credit an Overpayment If you show an overpayment of tax after com- pleting your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR for 2024, you can apply part or all of it to your estimated tax for 2025. On line 36 of Form 1040 or 1040- SR, enter the amount you want credited to your estimated tax rather than refunded. T ake the amount you have credited into account when figuring your estimated tax payments. Y ou can’t have any of the amount you credi- ted to your estimated tax refunded to you until you file your tax return for the following year. Y ou also can’t use that overpayment in any other way. Pay Online The IRS offers an electronic payment option that is right for you. Paying online is convenient, secure, and helps make sure we get your pay- ments on time. T o pay your taxes online or for more information, go to IRS.gov/Payments . Y ou can pay using any of the following methods. •IRS Direct Pay. For online transfers di- rectly from your checking or savings ac- count at no cost to you, go to IRS.gov/ Payments . •Pay by Card or Digital Wallet. T o pay by debit or credit card or digital wallet, go to IRS.gov/Payments . A fee is charged by these service providers.Y ou can also pay by phone with a debit or credit card. See Debit or credit card under Pay by Phone, later. •Electronic Funds Withdrawal (EFW). This is an integrated e-file/ e-pay option of- fered only when filing your federal taxes electronically using tax preparation soft- ware, through a tax professional, or the IRS at IRS.gov/OPA . •Online Payment Agreement. If you can’t pay in full by the due date of your tax re- turn, you can apply for an online monthly installment agreement at IRS.gov/ Payments . Once you complete the online process, you will receive immediate notifi- cation of whether your agreement has been approved. A user fee is charged. •IRS2Go. This is the mobile application of the IRS. Y ou can access Direct Pay or Pay By Card by downloading the application. Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) This system allows you to pay your taxes online or by phone directly from your checking or sav- ing account.There is no fee for this service. Y ou must be enrolled either online or have an enroll- ment form mailed to you. See EFTPS under Pay by Phone , later. Pay by Phone Paying by phone is another safe and secure method of paying electronically. Use one of the following methods: (1) call one of the debit or credit card providers, or (2) use the Electronic Federal T ax Payment System (EFTPS) to pay directly from your checking or savings account. Debit or credit card. Call one of our service providers. Each charges a fee that varies by provider, card type, and payment amount. ACI Payments, Inc. (formerly Official Payments) 888-272-9829 www.fed.acipayonline.com Link2Gov Corporation 888-PAY-1040TM (888-729-1040) www.PAY1040.com EFTPS. T o get more information about EFTPS or to enroll in EFTPS, visit EFTPS.gov or call 800-555- 4477. T o contact EFTPS using T ele- communications Relay Services (TRS) for peo- ple who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech disability, dial 711 and then provide the TRS assistant the 800 -555- 4477 number above Page 45 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 43 --- Page 46 --- or 800 -733- 4829. Additional information about EFTPS is also available in Pub. 966. Pay by Mobile Device T o pay through your mobile device, download the IRS2Go application. Pay by Cash Cash is an in -person payment option for individ- uals provided through retail partners with a maximum of $1,000 per day per transaction. T o make a cash payment, you must choose a pay- ment processor online with ACI Payments, Inc. at fed.acipayonline.com or www.Pay1040.com , our official payment provider. For more informa- tion, go to IRS.gov/paywithcash or see Pub. 5250. Don't send cash payments through the mail. Pay by Check or Money Order Using the Estimated Tax Payment Voucher Before submitting a payment through the mail using the estimated tax payment voucher, please consider alternative methods. One of our safe, quick, and easy electronic payment options might be right for you. If you choose to mail in your payment, each payment of estimated tax by check or money or- der must be accompanied by a payment voucher from Form 1040-ES. During 2024, if you: •Made at least one estimated tax payment but not by electronic means, •Didn't use software or a paid preparer to prepare or file your return, then you should receive a copy of the 2025 Form 1040-ES with payment vouchers. The enclosed payment vouchers will be pre- printed with your name, address, and social se- curity number. Using the preprinted vouchers will speed processing, reduce the chance of er- ror, and help save processing costs. Use the window envelopes that came with your Form 1040 -ES package. If you use your own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay- ment vouchers to the address shown in the Form 1040 -ES instructions for the place where you live. No checks of $100 million or more accep- ted. The IRS can’t accept a single check (in- cluding a cashier’s check) for amounts of $100,000,000 ($100 million) or more. If you are sending $100 million or more by check, you’ll need to spread the payment over two or more checks with each check made out for an amount less than $100 million. This limit doesn’t apply to other methods of payment (such as electronic payments). Please consider a method of payment other than check if the amount of the payment is over $100 million. Note. These criteria can change without no- tice. If you don't receive a Form 1040 -ES pack- age and you are required to make an estimated tax payment, you should go to IRS.gov/ Form1040-ES and print a copy of Form 1040- ES that includes four blank payment vouchers. Complete one of these and make your payment timely to avoid penalties for pay- ing late. Don't use the address shown in the In- structions for Form 1040 for your esti- mated tax payments. If you didn't pay estimated tax last year, you can order Form 1040 -ES from the IRS (see the inside back cover of this publication) or down- load it from IRS.gov. Follow the instructions to make sure you use the vouchers correctly. Joint estimated tax payments. If you file a joint return and are making joint estimated tax payments, enter the names and social security numbers on the payment voucher in the same order as they will appear on the joint return. Change of address. Y ou must notify the IRS if you are making estimated tax payments and you changed your address during the year. Complete Form 8822, Change of Address, and mail it to the address shown in the instructions for that form. Credit for Withholding and Estimated Tax for 2024 When you file your 2024 income tax return, take credit for all the income tax and excess social security or railroad retirement tax withheld from your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also take credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2024. These credits are subtracted from your total tax. Because these credits are refundable, you should file a return and claim these credits, even if you don't owe tax. Two or more employers. If you had two or more employers in 2024 and were paid wages of more than $168,600, too much social secur- ity or tier 1 railroad retirement tax may have been withheld from your pay. Y ou may be able to claim the excess as a credit against your in- come tax when you file your return. See the In- structions for Form 1040 for more information. Withholding If you had income tax withheld during 2024, you should be sent a statement by January 31, 2025, showing your income and the tax with- held. Depending on the source of your income, you should receive: •Form W-2, Wage and T ax Statement; •Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings; or •A form in the 1099 series. Forms W -2 and W -2G. If you file a paper re- turn, always file Form W -2 with your income tax return. File Form W -2G with your return only if it shows any federal income tax withheld from your winnings. Y ou should get at least two copies of each form. If you file a paper return, attach one copy to the front of your federal income tax return. Keep one copy for your records. Y ou should also receive copies to file with your state and lo- cal returns. CAUTION!Form W-2 Y our employer is required to provide or send Form W -2 to you no later than January 31, 2025. Y ou should receive a separate Form W -2 from each employer you worked for. If you stopped working before the end of 2024, your employer could have given you your Form W -2 at any time after you stopped work- ing. However, your employer must provide or send it to you by January 31, 2025. If you ask for the form, your employer must send it to you within 30 days after receiving your written request or within 30 days after your final wage payment, whichever is later. If you haven't received your Form W -2 by January 31, you should ask your employer for it. If you don't receive it by early February, call the IRS. Form W -2 shows your total pay and other compensation and the income tax, social secur- ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur- ing the year. Include the federal income tax withheld (as shown in box 2 of Form W -2) on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25a. In addition, Form W -2 is used to report any taxable sick pay you received and any income tax withheld from your sick pay. Form W-2G If you had gambling winnings in 2024, the payer may have withheld income tax. If tax was with- held, the payer will give you a Form W -2G showing the amount you won and the amount of tax withheld. Report the amounts you won on Schedule 1 (Form 1040). T ake credit for the tax withheld on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25c. The 1099 Series Most forms in the 1099 series aren’t filed with your return. These forms should be furnished to you by January 31, 2025 (or, for Forms 1099 -B, 1099- S, and certain Forms 1099 -MISC, by Feb- ruary 15, 2025). Unless instructed to file any of these forms with your return, keep them for your records. There are several different forms in this series, which are not listed. See the instructions for the specific Form 1099 for more information. Form 1099 -R. Attach Form 1099 -R to your pa- per return if box 4 shows federal income tax withheld. Include the amount withheld in the to- tal on line 25b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Backup withholding. If you were subject to backup withholding on income you received during 2024, include the amount withheld, as shown on your Form 1099, in the total on line 25b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Form Not Correct If you receive a form with incorrect information on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected form. Call the telephone number or write to the address given for the payer on the form. The corrected Form W- 2G or Form 1099 you receive will have an “X” in the “CORRECTED” box at the top of the form. A special form, Form W -2c, Cor- rected Wage and T ax Statement, is used to cor- rect a Form W-2. In certain situations, you will receive two forms in place of the original incorrect form. This Page 46 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 44 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 47 --- will happen when your taxpayer identification number is wrong or missing, your name and ad- dress are wrong, or you received the wrong type of form (for example, a Form 1099 -DIV , Dividends and Distributions, instead of a Form 1099- INT , Interest Income). One new form you receive will be the same incorrect form or have the same incorrect information, but all money amounts will be zero. This form will have an “X” in the “CORRECTED” box at the top of the form. The second new form should have all the cor- rect information, prepared as though it is the original (the “CORRECTED” box won't be checked). Form Received After Filing If you file your return and you later receive a form for income that you didn't include on your return, you should report the income and take credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form 1040- X, Amended U.S. Individual Income T ax Return. Separate Returns If you are married but file a separate return, you can take credit only for the tax withheld from your own income. Don't include any amount withheld from your spouse's income. However, different rules may apply if you live in a com- munity property state. Community property states are listed in chapter 2. For more information on these rules, and some exceptions, see Pub. 555, Commun- ity Property. Estimated Tax T ake credit for all your estimated tax payments for 2024 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 26. In- clude any overpayment from 2023 that you had credited to your 2024 estimated tax. Name changed. If you changed your name, and you made estimated tax payments using your old name, attach a brief statement to the front of your paper tax return indicating: •When you made the payments,•The amount of each payment, •Y our name when you made the payments, and •Y our social security number. The statement should cover payments you made jointly with your spouse as well as any you made separately. Be sure to report the change to the Social Security Administration. This prevents delays in processing your return and issuing any refunds. Separate Returns If you and your spouse made separate estima- ted tax payments for 2024 and you file separate returns, you can take credit only for your own payments. If you made joint estimated tax payments, you must decide how to divide the payments between your returns. One of you can claim all of the estimated tax paid and the other none, or you can divide it in any other way you agree on. If you can’t agree, you must divide the payments in proportion to each spouse's indi- vidual tax as shown on your separate returns for 2024. Divorced Taxpayers If you made joint estimated tax payments for 2024, and you were divorced during the year, either you or your former spouse can claim all of the joint payments, or you each can claim part of them. If you can’t agree on how to divide the payments, you must divide them in proportion to each spouse's individual tax as shown on your separate returns for 2024. If you claim any of the joint payments on your tax return, enter your former spouse's so- cial security number (SSN) in the space provi- ded on the front of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you divorced and remarried in 2024, enter your present spouse's SSN in the space provided on the front of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Also, on the dotted line next to line 26, enter your former spouse’s SSN, followed by “DIV .”Underpayment Penalty for 2024 If you didn't pay enough tax, either through with- holding or by making timely estimated tax pay- ments, you will have an underpayment of esti- mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty. Generally, you won't have to pay a penalty for 2024 if any of the following apply. •The total of your withholding and estimated tax payments was at least as much as your 2023 tax (or 110% of your 2023 tax if your AGI was more than $150,000, $75,000 if your 2024 filing status is married filing sep- arately) and you paid all required estima- ted tax payments on time; •The tax balance due on your 2024 return is no more than 10% of your total 2024 tax, and you paid all required estimated tax payments on time; •Y our total 2024 tax minus your withholding and refundable credits is less than $1,000; •Y ou didn't have a tax liability for 2023 and your 2023 tax year was 12 months; or •Y ou didn't have any withholding taxes and your current year tax less any household employment taxes is less than $1,000. Farmers and fishers. Special rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher. See the Instructions for Form 2210-F for more information. IRS can figure the penalty for you. If you think you owe the penalty but you don't want to figure it yourself when you file your tax return, you may not have to. Generally, the IRS will fig- ure the penalty for you and send you a bill. How- ever, if you think you are able to lower or elimi- nate your penalty, you must complete Form 2210 or Form 2210- F and attach it to your paper return. See Instructions for Form 2210 for more information.Page 47 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 45 --- Page 48 --- Part Two. Income and Adjustments to IncomeThe five chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income and adjustments to income. They explain which income is and isn’t taxed and discuss some of the adjustments to income that you can make in figuring your adjusted gross income. The Form 1040 and 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these chapters are: •Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income; •Schedule 2, Part II, Other T axes; and •Schedule 3, Part II, Other Payments and Refundable Credits. T able V . Other Adjustments to Income Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication. IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for...THEN see... contributions to a health savings account Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other T ax-Favored Health Plans . moving expenses Pub. 3, Armed Forces’ T ax Guide . part of your self-employment tax chapter 11 . self-employed health insurance Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expenses . payments to self-employed SEP , SIMPLE, and qualified plans Pub. 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business . penalty on the early withdrawal of savings chapter 6 . contributions to an Archer MSA Pub. 969 . reforestation amortization or expense chapters 4 and 7 of Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide . contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension plansPub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income . expenses from the rental of personal property chapter 8 . certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits (sub-pay)chapter 8 . foreign housing costs chapter 4 of Pub. 54, T ax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad . jury duty pay given to your employer chapter 8 . contributions by certain ministers or chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section 403(b) plansPub. 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers . attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving IRS awards to whistleblowersPub. 525 .Page 48 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 46 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 49 --- 5. Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings What’s New Deferred compensation contribution limit increased. If you participate in a 401(k) plan, 403(b) plan, or the federal government's Thrift Savings Plan, the total annual amount you can contribute is increased to $23,000 ($30,500 if age 50 or older) for 2024. This also applies to most section 457 plans. Health flexible spending arrangements (health FSAs) under cafeteria plans. For tax years beginning in 2024, the dollar limitation un- der section 125(i) on voluntary employee salary reductions for contributions to health FSAs is $3,200. Introduction This chapter discusses compensation received for services as an employee, such as wages, salaries, and fringe benefits. The following top- ics are included. •Bonuses and awards. •Special rules for certain employees. •Sickness and injury benefits. The chapter explains what income is inclu- ded and isn’t included in the employee's gross income. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 463 T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses 502 Medical and Dental Expenses 524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled 525 T axable and Nontaxable Income 526 Charitable Contributions 550 Investment Income and Expenses 554 T ax Guide for Seniors 575 Pension and Annuity Income 907 T ax Highlights for Persons With Disabilities 926 Household Employer's T ax Guide 3920 T ax Relief for Victims of T errorist Attacks For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . 463 502 524 525 526 550 554 575 907 926 3920Employee Compensation This section discusses various types of em- ployee compensation, including fringe benefits, retirement plan contributions, stock options, and restricted property. Form W -2. If you’re an employee, you should receive a Form W -2 from your employer show- ing the pay you received for your services. In- clude your pay on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 1a, even if you don’t receive a Form W-2. In some instances, your employer isn’t re- quired to give you a Form W -2. Y our employer isn’t required to give you a Form W -2 if you per- form household work in your employer's home for less than $2,700 in cash wages during the calendar year and you have no federal income taxes withheld from your wages. Household work is work done in or around an employer's home. Some examples of workers who do household work are: •Babysitters, •Butlers, •Caretakers, •Cooks, •Domestic workers, •Drivers, •Health aides, •Housecleaning workers, •Housekeepers, •Maids, •Nannies, •Private nurses, and •Y ard workers. See Schedule H (Form 1040), Household Employment T axes, and its instructions, and Pub. 926 for more information. If you performed services, other than as an independent contractor, and your employer didn’t withhold social security and Medicare taxes from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncollected Social Security and Medicare T ax on Wages, with your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. See Form 8919 and its instructions for more in- formation on how to figure unreported wages and taxes and how to include them on your in- come tax return. Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, either in the child's home or in your home or other place of business, the pay you receive must be included in your income. If you aren’t an employee, you’re probably self -employed and must include payments for your services on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business. Y ou generally aren’t an employee un- less you’re subject to the will and control of the person who employs you as to what you’re to do and how you’re to do it. Babysitting. If you’re paid to babysit, even for relatives or neighborhood children, whether on a regular basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare providers apply to you. Self- employment tax. Whether you're an em- ployee or self -employed person, your income could be subject to self -employment tax. See the instructions for Schedules C and SE (Form 1040) if you're self -employed. Also, see Pub. 926 for more information. Miscellaneous Compensation This section discusses different types of em- ployee compensation. Advance commissions and other earnings. If you receive advance commissions or other amounts for services to be performed in the fu- ture and you’re a cash -method taxpayer, you must include these amounts in your income in the year you receive them. If you repay unearned commissions or other amounts in the same year you receive them, re- duce the amount included in your income by the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax year, you can deduct the repayment as an itemized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, or you may be able to take a credit for that year. See Repayments in chapter 8. Allowances and reimbursements. If you re- ceive travel, transportation, or other business expense allowances or reimbursements from your employer, see Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you’re a member of the military and you’re reimbursed for moving expenses, see Pub. 521, Moving Expenses. Back pay awards. If you receive an amount in payment of a settlement or judgment for back pay, you must include the amount of the pay- ment in your income. This includes payments made to you for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums, and unpaid health insurance premi- ums. They should be reported to you by your employer on Form W-2. Bonuses and awards. If you receive a bonus or award (cash, goods, services, etc.) from your employer, you must include its value in your in- come. However, if your employer merely prom- ises to pay you a bonus or award at some future time, it isn’t taxable until you receive it or it’s made available to you. Employee achievement award. If you re- ceive tangible personal property (other than cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as an award for length of service or safety achieve- ment, you can generally exclude its value from your income. The amount you can exclude is limited to your employer's cost and can’t be more than $1,600 for qualified plan awards or $400 for nonqualified plan awards for all such awards you receive during the year. Y our em- ployer can tell you whether your award is a qualified plan award. Y our employer must make the award as part of a meaningful presentation, under conditions and circumstances that don’t create a significant likelihood of it being dis- guised pay. However, the exclusion doesn’t apply to the following awards. •A length-of-service award if you received it for less than 5 years of service or if you re- ceived another length-of-service award during the year or the previous 4 years. •A safety achievement award if you’re a manager, administrator, clerical employee, Page 49 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 47 --- Page 50 --- or other professional employee or if more than 10% of eligible employees previously received safety achievement awards dur- ing the year. Example. Y ou received three employee achievement awards during the year: a nonqua- lified plan award of a watch valued at $250, two qualified plan awards of a stereo valued at $1,000, and a set of golf clubs valued at $500. Assuming that the requirements for qualified plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each award by itself would be excluded from income. How- ever, because the $1,750 total value of the awards is more than $1,600, you must include $150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in your income. Differential wage payments. This is any pay- ment made to you by an employer for any pe- riod during which you are, for a period of more than 30 days, an active duty member of the uni- formed services and represents all or a portion of the wages you would have received from the employer during that period. These payments are treated as wages and are subject to income tax withholding, but not FICA or FUTA taxes. The payments are reported as wages on Form W-2. Government cost -of-living allowances. Most payments received by U.S. Government civilian employees for working abroad are taxa- ble. However, certain cost -of-living allowances are tax free. Pub. 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees Stationed Abroad, explains the tax treatment of allowances, differentials, and other special pay you receive for employment abroad. Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. Y our employer may report to you the total amount of deferrals for the year under a non- qualified deferred compensation plan on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y . This amount isn’t in- cluded in your income. However, if at any time during the tax year, the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or isn’t operated under those requirements, all amounts deferred under the plan for the tax year and all preceding tax years to the extent vested and not previously included in income are included in your income for the current year. This amount is included in your wages shown on Form W -2, box 1. It’s also shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Z. Note received for services. If your employer gives you a secured note as payment for your services, you must include the fair market value (usually the discount value) of the note in your income for the year you receive it. When you later receive payments on the note, a propor- tionate part of each payment is the recovery of the fair market value that you previously inclu- ded in your income. Don’t include that part again in your income. Include the rest of the payment in your income in the year of payment. If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable unsecured note as payment for your services, payments on the note that are credited toward the principal amount of the note are compensa- tion income when you receive them. Severance pay. If you receive a severance payment when your employment with your em- ployer ends or is terminated, you must include this amount in your income.Accrued leave payment. If you’re a federal employee and receive a lump -sum payment for accrued annual leave when you retire or resign, this amount will be included as wages on your Form W-2. If you resign from one agency and are reem- ployed by another agency, you may have to re- pay part of your lump -sum annual leave pay- ment to the second agency. Y ou can reduce gross wages by the amount you repaid in the same tax year in which you received it. Attach to your tax return a copy of the receipt or state- ment given to you by the agency you repaid to explain the difference between the wages on the return and the wages on your Forms W-2. Outplacement services. If you choose to accept a reduced amount of severance pay so that you can receive outplacement services (such as training in résumé writing and inter- view techniques), you must include the unre- duced amount of the severance pay in income. Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer while you’re sick or injured is part of your salary or wages. In addition, you must include in your income sick pay benefits received from any of the following payers. •A welfare fund. •A state sickness or disability fund. •An association of employers or employees. •An insurance company, if your employer paid for the plan. However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- dent or health insurance policy yourself, the benefits you receive under the policy aren’t tax- able. For more information, see Pub. 525, T axa- ble and Nontaxable Income. Social security and Medicare taxes paid by employer. If you and your employer have an agreement that your employer pays your social security and Medicare taxes without deducting them from your gross wages, you must report the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages on your tax return. The payment is also treated as wages for figuring your social security and Medicare taxes and your social security and Medicare benefits. However, these payments aren’t treated as social security and Medicare wages if you’re a household worker or a farm worker. Stock appreciation rights. Don’t include a stock appreciation right granted by your em- ployer in income until you exercise (use) the right. When you use the right, you’re entitled to a cash payment equal to the fair market value of the corporation's stock on the date of use minus the fair market value on the date the right was granted. Y ou include the cash payment in your income in the year you use the right. Fringe Benefits Fringe benefits received in connection with the performance of your services are included in your income as compensation unless you pay fair market value for them or they’re specifically excluded by law. Refraining from the perform- ance of services (for example, under a covenant not to compete) is treated as the performance of services for purposes of these rules.Accounting period. Y ou must use the same accounting period your employer uses to report your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Y our em- ployer has the option to report taxable noncash fringe benefits by using either of the following rules. •The general rule: benefits are reported for a full calendar year (January 1–December 31). •The special accounting period rule: bene- fits provided during the last 2 months of the calendar year (or any shorter period) are treated as paid during the following calen- dar year. For example, each year your em- ployer reports the value of benefits provi- ded during the last 2 months of the prior year and the first 10 months of the current year. Y our employer doesn’t have to use the same ac- counting period for each fringe benefit, but must use the same period for all employees who re- ceive a particular benefit. Y ou must use the same accounting period that you use to report the benefit to claim an employee business deduction (for use of a car, for example). Form W -2. Y our employer must include all tax- able fringe benefits in Form W -2, box 1, as wa- ges, tips, and other compensation and, if appli- cable, in boxes 3 and 5 as social security and Medicare wages. Although not required, your employer may include the total value of fringe benefits in box 14 (or on a separate statement). However, if your employer provided you with a vehicle and included 100% of its annual lease value in your income, the employer must sepa- rately report this value to you in box 14 (or on a separate statement). Accident or Health Plan In most cases, the value of accident or health plan coverage provided to you by your employer isn’t included in your income. Benefits you re- ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex- plained later under Sickness and Injury Bene- fits. For information on the items covered in this section, other than long -term care coverage, see Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other T ax-Favored Health Plans. Long- term care coverage. Contributions by your employer to provide coverage for long -term care services generally aren’t included in your income. However, contributions made through a flexible spending or similar arrangement offered by your employer must be included in your in- come. This amount will be reported as wages in Form W-2, box 1. Contributions you make to the plan are dis- cussed in Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expen- ses. Archer MSA contributions. Contributions by your employer to your Archer MSA generally aren’t included in your income. Their total will be reported in Form W -2, box 12, with code R. Y ou must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer MSAs and Long -T erm Care Insurance Con- tracts. File the form with your return. Health flexible spending arrangement (health FSA). If your employer provides a Page 50 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 51 --- health FSA that qualifies as an accident or health plan, the amount of your salary reduc- tion, and reimbursements of your medical care expenses, in most cases, aren’t included in your income. Note. Health FSAs are subject to a limit on salary reduction contributions for plan years be- ginning after 2012. For tax years beginning in 2024, the dollar limitation (as indexed for infla- tion) on voluntary employee salary reductions for contributions to health FSAs is $3,200. Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies as an accident or health plan, coverage and re- imbursements of your medical care expenses generally aren’t included in your income. Health savings account (HSA). If you’re an eligible individual, you and any other person, in- cluding your employer or a family member, can make contributions to your HSA. Contributions, other than employer contributions, are deducti- ble on your return whether or not you itemize deductions. Contributions made by your em- ployer aren’t included in your income. Distribu- tions from your HSA that are used to pay quali- fied medical expenses aren’t included in your income. Distributions not used for qualified medical expenses are included in your income. See Pub. 969 for the requirements of an HSA. Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide partner's HSA aren’t contributions by an em- ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- bution of money and aren’t included in the part- ner's gross income. Contributions by a partnership to a partner's HSA for services ren- dered are treated as guaranteed payments that are includible in the partner's gross income. In both situations, the partner can deduct the con- tribution made to the partner's HSA. Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% shareholder- employee's HSA for services ren- dered are treated as guaranteed payments and are includible in the shareholder -employee's gross income. The shareholder -employee can deduct the contribution made to the share- holder-employee's HSA. Qualified HSA funding distribution. Y ou can make a one -time distribution from your indi- vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and you generally won’t include any of the distribu- tion in your income. Adoption Assistance Y ou may be able to exclude from your income amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em- ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con- nection with your adoption of an eligible child. See the Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more information. Adoption benefits are reported by your em- ployer in Form W -2, box 12, with code T . They are also included as social security and Medi- care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they aren’t included as wages in box 1. T o determine the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form with your return.De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits If your employer provides you with a product or service and the cost of it is so small that it would be unreasonable for the employer to account for it, you generally don’t include its value in your income. In most cases, don’t include in your in- come the value of discounts at company cafete- rias, cab fares home when working overtime, and company picnics. Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a tur- key, ham, or other item of nominal value at Christmas or other holidays, don’t include the value of the gift in your income. However, if your employer gives you cash or a cash equivalent, you must include it in your income. Educational Assistance Y ou can exclude from your income up to $5,250 of qualified employer -provided educational as- sistance. For more information, see Pub. 970, T ax Benefits for Education. Group-Term Life Insurance In most cases, the cost of up to $50,000 of group- term life insurance coverage provided to you by your employer (or former employer) isn’t included in your income. However, you must in- clude in income the cost of employer -provided insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 of coverage reduced by any amount you pay to- ward the purchase of the insurance. For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded and Entire cost taxed , later. If your employer provided more than $50,000 of coverage, the amount included in your income is reported as part of your wages in Form W -2, box 1. Also, it’s shown separately in box 12 with code C. Group- term life insurance. This insurance is term life insurance protection (insurance for a fixed period of time) that: •Provides a general death benefit, •Is provided to a group of employees, •Is provided under a policy carried by the employer, and •Provides an amount of insurance to each employee based on a formula that prevents individual selection. Permanent benefits. If your group -term life insurance policy includes permanent benefits, such as a paid -up or cash surrender value, you must include in your income, as wages, the cost of the permanent benefits minus the amount you pay for them. Y our employer should be able to tell you the amount to include in your income. Accidental death benefits. Insurance that provides accidental or other death benefits but doesn’t provide general death benefits (travel insurance, for example) isn’t group -term life in- surance. Former employer. If your former employer provided more than $50,000 of group -term life insurance coverage during the year, the amount included in your income is reported as wages in Form W -2, box 1. Also, it’s shown separately in box 12 with code C. Box 12 will also show the amount of uncollected social security and Medi- care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes M and N. Y ou must pay these taxes with your in- come tax return. Include them on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 13. Two or more employers. Y our exclusion for employer- provided group -term life insurance coverage can’t exceed the cost of $50,000 of coverage, whether the insurance is provided by a single employer or multiple employers. If two or more employers provide insurance coverage that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- ported as wages on your Forms W -2 won’t be correct. Y ou must figure how much to include in your income. Reduce the amount you figure by any amount reported in Form W -2, box 12, with code C, add the result to the wages reported in box 1, and report the total on your return. Figuring the taxable cost. Use Worksheet 5-1 to figure the amount to include in your in- come. Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of Group-Term Life Insurance To Include in Income Keep for Y our Records 1.Enter the total amount of your insurance coverage from your employer(s) ............ 1. 2.Limit on exclusion for employer-provided group-term life insurance coverage .............. 2.50,000 3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 ................. 3. 4.Divide line 3 by $1,000. Figure to the nearest tenth ................. 4. 5.Go to T able 5 -1. Using your age on the last day of the tax year, find your age group in the left column, and enter the cost from the column on the right for your age group ................ 5. 6.Multiply line 4 by line 5 ................. 6. 7.Enter the number of full months of coverage at this cost .................. 7. 8.Multiply line 6 by line 7 ................. 8. 9.Enter the premiums you paid per month ..... 9. 10.Enter the number of months you paid the premiums ..... 10. 11.Multiply line 9 by line 10 ................ 11. 12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. Include this amount in your income as wages ............... 12. Page 51 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 49 --- Page 52 --- T able 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of Group-Term Life Insurance for 1 Month Age Cost Under 25 ................. $0.05 25 through 29 .............. 0.06 30 through 34 .............. 0.08 35 through 39 .............. 0.09 40 through 44 .............. 0.10 45 through 49 .............. 0.15 50 through 54 .............. 0.23 55 through 59 .............. 0.43 60 through 64 .............. 0.66 65 through 69 .............. 1.27 70 and above .............. 2.06 Example. Y ou are 51 years old and work for employers A and B. Both employers provide group- term life insurance coverage for you for the entire year. Y our coverage is $35,000 with employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Y ou pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- ployer B group plan. Y ou figure the amount to include in your income as shown in Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of Group -T erm Life Insur- ance T o Include in Income —Illustrated next. Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of Group-Term Life Insurance To Include in Income—Illustrated Keep for Y our Records 1.Enter the total amount of your insurance coverage from your employer(s) ............ 1.80,000 2.Limit on exclusion for employer-provided group-term life insurance coverage .............. 2.50,000 3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 ................. 3.30,000 4.Divide line 3 by $1,000. Figure to the nearest tenth ................. 4. 30.0 5.Go to T able 5 -1. Using your age on the last day of the tax year, find your age group in the left column, and enter the cost from the column on the right for your age group ................ 5. 0.23 6.Multiply line 4 by line 5 ................. 6. 6.90 7.Enter the number of full months of coverage at this cost .................. 7. 12 8.Multiply line 6 by line 7 ................. 8. 82.80 9.Enter the premiums you paid per month ..... 9. 4.15 10.Enter the number of months you paid the premiums ..... 10. 12 11.Multiply line 9 by line 10 ................ 11. 49.80 12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. Include this amount in your income as wages ............... 12. 33.00Entire cost excluded. Y ou aren’t taxed on the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the fol- lowing circumstances apply. 1.Y ou’re permanently and totally disabled and have ended your employment. 2.Y our employer is the beneficiary of the pol- icy for the entire period the insurance is in force during the tax year. 3.A charitable organization (defined in Pub. 526, Charitable Contributions) to which contributions are deductible is the only beneficiary of the policy for the entire pe- riod the insurance is in force during the tax year. (Y ou aren’t entitled to a deduction for a charitable contribution for naming a charitable organization as the beneficiary of your policy.) 4.The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and: a.Y ou retired before January 2, 1984, and were covered by the plan when you retired, or b.Y ou reached age 55 before January 2, 1984, and were employed by the em- ployer or its predecessor in 1983. Entire cost taxed. Y ou’re taxed on the entire cost of group -term life insurance if either of the following circumstances apply. •The insurance is provided by your em- ployer through a qualified employees' trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified annu- ity plan. •Y ou're a key employee and your employer's plan discriminates in favor of key employ- ees. Retirement Planning Services Generally, don’t include the value of qualified re- tirement planning services provided to you and your spouse by your employer's qualified retire- ment plan. Qualified services include retirement planning advice, information about your em- ployer's retirement plan, and information about how the plan may fit into your overall individual retirement income plan. Y ou can’t exclude the value of any tax preparation, accounting, legal, or brokerage services provided by your em- ployer. Transportation If your employer provides you with a qualified transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded from your income, up to certain limits. A quali- fied transportation fringe benefit is: •T ransportation in a commuter highway ve- hicle (such as a van) between your home and work place, •A transit pass, or •Qualified parking. Cash reimbursement by your employer for these expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar- rangement is also excludable. However, cash reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable only if a voucher or similar item that can be ex- changed only for a transit pass isn’t readily available for direct distribution to you.Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe benefits can’t be more than $315 a month. The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe benefit can’t be more than $315 a month. If the benefits have a value that is more than these limits, the excess must be included in your income. Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high- way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not in- cluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehicle's mileage must reasonably be expected to be: •For transporting employees between their homes and workplace, and •On trips during which employees occupy at least half of the vehicle's adult seating ca- pacity (not including the driver). Transit pass. This is any pass, token, farecard, voucher, or similar item entitling a person to ride mass transit (whether public or private) free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter high- way vehicle operated by a person in the busi- ness of transporting persons for compensation. Qualified parking. This is parking provided to an employee at or near the employer's place of business. It also includes parking provided on or near a location from which the employee commutes to work by mass transit, in a com- muter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It doesn’t include parking at or near the employee's home. Retirement Plan Contributions Y our employer's contributions to a qualified re- tirement plan for you aren’t included in income at the time contributed. (Y our employer can tell you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) However, the cost of life insurance coverage in- cluded in the plan may have to be included. See Group -T erm Life Insurance , earlier, under Fringe Benefits . If your employer pays into a nonqualified plan for you, you must generally include the contributions in your income as wages for the tax year in which the contributions are made. However, if your interest in the plan isn’t trans- ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of for- feiture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the time of the contribution, you don’t have to in- clude the value of your interest in your income until it’s transferable or is no longer subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. For information on distributions from re- tirement plans, see Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income (or Pub. 721, T ax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you’re a federal employee or retiree). Elective deferrals. If you’re covered by certain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to have part of your compensation contributed by your employer to a retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. The amount you set aside (called an “elective deferral”) is treated as an employer contribution to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, other than a designated Roth contribution (discussed later), isn’t included in wages subject to income tax at the time TIPPage 52 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 53 --- contributed. Rather, it’s subject to income tax when distributed from the plan. However, it’s in- cluded in wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes at the time contributed. Elective deferrals include elective contribu- tions to the following retirement plans. 1.Cash or deferred arrangements (section 401(k) plans). 2.The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- ees. 3.Salary reduction simplified employee pen- sion plans (SARSEP). 4.Savings incentive match plans for employ- ees (SIMPLE plans). 5.T ax-sheltered annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). 6.Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. 7.Section 457 plans. Qualified automatic contribution arrange- ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu- tion arrangement, your employer can treat you as having elected to have a part of your com- pensation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. Y ou are to receive written notice of your rights and obligations under the qualified automatic contribution arrangement. The notice must ex- plain: •Y our rights to elect not to have elective contributions made, or to have contribu- tions made at a different percentage; and •How contributions made will be invested in the absence of any investment decision by you. Y ou must be given a reasonable period of time after receipt of the notice and before the first elective contribution is made to make an election with respect to the contributions. Overall limit on deferrals. For 2024, in most cases, you shouldn’t have deferred more than a total of $23,000 of contributions to the plans listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. The limit for SIMPLE plans is $16,000. The limit for section 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation. The limit for section 457 plans is the lesser of your in- cludible compensation or $23,000. Amounts deferred under specific plan limits are part of the overall limit on deferrals. Designated Roth contributions. Employ- ers with section 401(k) plans, section 403(b) plans, and governmental section 457 plans can create qualified Roth contribution programs so that you may elect to have part or all of your elective deferrals to the plan designated as af- ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth contributions are treated as elective deferrals, except that they’re included in income at the time contributed. Excess deferrals. Y our employer or plan administrator should apply the proper annual limit when figuring your plan contributions. How- ever, you’re responsible for monitoring the total you defer to ensure that the deferrals aren’t more than the overall limit. If you set aside more than the limit, the ex- cess must generally be included in your income for that year, unless you have an excess deferral of a designated Roth contribution. See Pub. 525 for a discussion of the tax treatment of excess deferrals. Catch- up contributions. Y ou may be al- lowed catch -up contributions (additional elec- tive deferral) if you’re age 50 or older by the end of the tax year. Stock Options If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sell stock or other property as payment for your services, you will usually have income when you receive the option, when you exercise the option (use it to buy or sell the stock or other property), or when you sell or otherwise dispose of the option. However, if your option is a statu- tory stock option, you won’t have any income until you sell or exchange your stock. Y our em- ployer can tell you which kind of option you hold. For more information, see Pub. 525. Restricted Property In most cases, if you receive property for your services, you must include its fair market value in your income in the year you receive the prop- erty. However, if you receive stock or other property that has certain restrictions that affect its value, you don’t include the value of the property in your income until it has substantially vested. (Although you can elect to include the value of the property in your income in the year it’s transferred to you.) For more information, see Restricted Property in Pub. 525. Dividends received on restricted stock. Dividends you receive on restricted stock are treated as compensation and not as dividend income. Y our employer should include these payments on your Form W-2. Stock you elected to include in income. Dividends you receive on restricted stock you elected to include in your income in the year transferred are treated the same as any other dividends. Report them on your return as divi- dends. For a discussion of dividends, see Pub. 550, Investment Income and Expenses. For information on how to treat dividends re- ported on both your Form W -2 and Form 1099- DIV , see Dividends received on restricted stock in Pub. 525. Special Rules for Certain Employees This section deals with special rules for people in certain types of employment: members of the clergy, members of religious orders, people working for foreign employers, military person- nel, and volunteers. Clergy Generally, if you’re a member of the clergy, you must include in your income offerings and fees you receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the of- fering is made to the religious institution, it isn’t taxable to you.If you’re a member of a religious organiza- tion and you give your outside earnings to the religious organization, you must still include the earnings in your income. However, you may be entitled to a charitable contribution deduction for the amount paid to the organization. See Pub. 526. Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a member of the clergy is usually treated as any other pension or annuity. It must be reported on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Housing. Special rules for housing apply to members of the clergy. Under these rules, you don’t include in your income the rental value of a home (including utilities) or a designated housing allowance provided to you as part of your pay. However, the exclusion can’t be more than the reasonable pay for your services. If you pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow- ance designated for utility cost, up to your ac- tual cost. The home or allowance must be provi- ded as compensation for your services as an ordained, licensed, or commissioned minister. However, you must include the rental value of the home or the housing allowance as earnings from self -employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040) if you’re subject to the self -employment tax. For more information, see Pub. 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers. Members of Religious Orders If you’re a member of a religious order who has taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings that you renounce and turn over to the order de- pends on whether your services are performed for the order. Services performed for the order. If you’re performing the services as an agent of the order in the exercise of duties required by the order, don’t include in your income the amounts turned over to the order. If your order directs you to perform services for another agency of the supervising church or an associated institution, you’re considered to be performing the services as an agent of the order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an or- der that you turn over to the order aren’t inclu- ded in your income. Example. Y ou’re a member of a church or- der and have taken a vow of poverty. Y ou re- nounce any claims to your earnings and turn over to the order any salaries or wages you earn. Y ou’re a registered nurse, so your order assigns you to work in a hospital that is an as- sociated institution of the church. However, you remain under the general direction and control of the order. Y ou’re considered to be an agent of the order and any wages you earn at the hospi- tal that you turn over to your order aren’t inclu- ded in your income. Services performed outside the order. If you’re directed to work outside the order, your services aren’t an exercise of duties required by the order unless they meet both of the following requirements. •They’re the kind of services that are ordina- rily the duties of members of the order.Page 53 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 51 --- Page 54 --- •They’re part of the duties that you must ex- ercise for, or on behalf of, the religious or- der as its agent. If you’re an employee of a third party, the serv- ices you perform for the third party won’t be considered directed or required of you by the order. Amounts you receive for these services are included in your income, even if you have taken a vow of poverty. Example. Y ou are a member of a religious order and have taken a vow of poverty. Y ou re- nounce all claims to your earnings and turn over your earnings to the order. Y ou are a schoolteacher. Y ou were instruc- ted by the superiors of the order to get a job with a private tax -exempt school. Y ou became an employee of the school, and, at your re- quest, the school made the salary payments di- rectly to the order. Because you are an employee of the school, you’re performing services for the school rather than as an agent of the order. The wages you earn working for the school are included in your income. Foreign Employer Special rules apply if you work for a foreign em- ployer. U.S. citizen. If you’re a U.S. citizen who works in the United States for a foreign government, an international organization, a foreign em- bassy, or any foreign employer, you must in- clude your salary in your income. Social security and Medicare taxes. Y ou’re exempt from social security and Medi- care employee taxes if you’re employed in the United States by an international organization or a foreign government. However, you must pay self- employment tax on your earnings from services performed in the United States, even though you aren’t self -employed. This rule also applies if you’re an employee of a qualifying wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- ernment. Employees of international organizations or foreign governments. Y our compensation for official services to an international organization is exempt from federal income tax if you aren’t a citizen of the United States or you’re a citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you’re a citizen of the United States). Y our compensation for official services to a foreign government is exempt from federal in- come tax if all of the following are true. •Y ou aren’t a citizen of the United States or you’re a citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you’re a citizen of the United States). •Y our work is like the work done by employ- ees of the United States in foreign coun- tries. •The foreign government gives an equal ex- emption to employees of the United States in its country. Waiver of alien status. If you’re an alien who works for a foreign government or interna- tional organization and you file a waiver under section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Pub. 525. Employment abroad. For information on the tax treatment of income earned abroad, see Pub. 54. Military Payments you receive as a member of a military service are generally taxed as wages except for retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. Al- lowances generally aren’t taxed. For more infor- mation on the tax treatment of military allowan- ces and benefits, see Pub. 3, Armed Forces' T ax Guide. Differential wage payments. Any payments made to you by an employer during the time you’re performing service in the uniformed serv- ices are treated as compensation. These wages are subject to income tax withholding and are reported on a Form W -2. See the discussion under Miscellaneous Compensation , earlier. Military retirement pay. If your retirement pay is based on age or length of service, it’s taxable and must be included in your income as a pen- sion on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 1040- SR. Don’t include in your income the amount of any reduction in retirement or re- tainer pay to provide a survivor annuity for your spouse or children under the Retired Service- man's Family Protection Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. For more detailed discussion of survivor an- nuities, see Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity In- come. Disability. If you’re retired on disability, see Military and Government Disability Pensions un- der Sickness and Injury Benefits , later. Veterans' benefits. Don’t include in your in- come any veterans' benefits paid under any law, regulation, or administrative practice adminis- tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or their families aren’t taxable. •Education, training, and subsistence allow- ances. •Disability compensation and pension pay- ments for disabilities paid either to veter- ans or their families. •Grants for homes designed for wheelchair living. •Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who lost their sight or the use of their limbs. •Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi- dends paid either to veterans or their bene- ficiaries, including the proceeds of a veter- an's endowment policy paid before death. •Interest on insurance dividends you leave on deposit with the VA. •Benefits under a dependent-care assis- tance program. •The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a member of the Armed Forces who died af- ter September 10, 2001. •Payments made under the compensated work therapy program.•Any bonus payment by a state or political subdivision because of service in a combat zone. Volunteers The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similar agency is covered in the following discussions. Peace Corps. Living allowances you receive as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader for housing, utilities, household supplies, food, and clothing are generally exempt from tax. Taxable allowances. The following allow- ances, however, must be included in your in- come and reported as wages. •Allowances paid to your spouse and minor children while you’re a volunteer leader training in the United States. •Living allowances designated by the Direc- tor of the Peace Corps as basic compen- sation. These are allowances for personal items such as domestic help, laundry and clothing maintenance, entertainment and recreation, transportation, and other mis- cellaneous expenses. •Leave allowances. •Readjustment allowances or termination payments. These are considered received by you when credited to your account. Example. Y ou are a Peace Corps volun- teer and get $175 a month as a readjustment al- lowance during your period of service, to be paid to you in a lump sum at the end of your tour of duty. Although the allowance isn’t available to you until the end of your service, you must in- clude it in your income on a monthly basis as it’s credited to your account. Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If you’re a VISTA volunteer, you must include meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your in- come as wages. National Senior Services Corps programs. Don’t include in your income amounts you re- ceive for supportive services or reimbursements for out -of-pocket expenses from the following programs. •Retired Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP). •Foster Grandparent Program. •Senior Companion Program. Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE). If you receive amounts for suppor- tive services or reimbursements for out-of- pocket expenses from SCORE, don’t in- clude these amounts in gross income. Volunteer tax counseling. Don’t include in your income any reimbursements you receive for transportation, meals, and other expenses you have in training for, or actually providing, volunteer federal income tax counseling for the elderly (TCE). Y ou can deduct as a charitable contribution your unreimbursed out -of-pocket expenses in taking part in the volunteer income tax assis- tance (VITA) program. See Pub. 526.Page 54 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 52 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 55 --- Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi- cal responders. If you are a volunteer fire- fighter or emergency medical responder, don’t include in your income the following benefits you receive from a state or local government. •Rebates or reductions of property or in- come taxes you receive because of serv- ices you performed as a volunteer fire- fighter or emergency medical responder. •Payments you receive because of services you performed as a volunteer firefighter or emergency medical responder, up to $50 for each month you provided services. The excluded income reduces any related tax or contribution deduction. Sickness and Injury Benefits This section discusses sickness and injury ben- efits, including disability pensions, long -term care insurance contracts, workers' compensa- tion, and other benefits. In most cases, you must report as income any amount you receive for personal injury or sickness through an accident or health plan that is paid for by your employer. If both you and your employer pay for the plan, only the amount you receive that is due to your employer's pay- ments is reported as income. However, certain payments may not be taxable to you. For infor- mation on nontaxable payments, see Military and Government Disability Pensions and Other Sickness and Injury Benefits , later in this dis- cussion. Don’t report as income any amounts paid to reimburse you for medical ex- penses you incurred after the plan was established. Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of a health or accident insurance plan, don’t in- clude any amounts you receive from the plan for personal injury or sickness as income on your tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, you may have to include some, or all, of the re- imbursement in your income. See What if Y ou Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a Later Y ear? in Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expen- ses. Cafeteria plans. In most cases, if you’re cov- ered by an accident or health insurance plan through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insurance premiums wasn’t included in your in- come, you aren’t considered to have paid the premiums and you must include any benefits you receive in your income. If the amount of the premiums was included in your income, you’re considered to have paid the premiums, and any benefits you receive aren’t taxable. Disability Pensions If you retired on disability, you must include in income any disability pension you receive under a plan that is paid for by your employer. Y ou must report your taxable disability payments on line 1h of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR until you reach minimum retirement age. Minimum retirement TIPage is generally the age at which you can first receive a pension or annuity if you’re not disa- bled. Y ou may be entitled to a tax credit if you were permanently and totally disa- bled when you retired. For information on this credit and the definition of permanent and total disability, see Pub. 524, Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled. Beginning on the day after you reach mini- mum retirement age, payments you receive are taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the pay- ments on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 1040- SR. The rules for reporting pensions are explained in Disability Pensions in Pub. 575. For information on disability payments from a governmental program provided as a substi- tute for unemployment compensation, see Un- employment Benefits in chapter 8. Retirement and profit -sharing plans. If you receive payments from a retirement or profit- sharing plan that doesn’t provide for disa- bility retirement, don’t treat the payments as a disability pension. The payments must be re- ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor- mation on pensions, see Pub. 575. Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- bility, any lump- sum payment you receive for ac- crued annual leave is a salary payment. The payment is not a disability payment. Include it in your income in the tax year you receive it. Military and Government Disability Pensions Certain military and government disability pen- sions aren’t taxable. Service- connected disability. Y ou may be able to exclude from income amounts you re- ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance for personal injury or sickness resulting from ac- tive service in one of the following government services. •The armed forces of any country. •The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. •The Public Health Service. •The Foreign Service. Conditions for exclusion. Don’t include the disability payments in your income if any of the following conditions apply. 1.Y ou were entitled to receive a disability payment before September 25, 1975. 2.Y ou were a member of a listed government service or its reserve component, or were under a binding written commitment to be- come a member, on September 24, 1975. 3.Y ou receive the disability payments for a combat-related injury. This is a personal injury or sickness that: a.Results directly from armed conflict; b.T akes place while you’re engaged in extra-hazardous service; c.T akes place under conditions simulat- ing war, including training exercises such as maneuvers; or TIPd.Is caused by an instrumentality of war. 4.Y ou would be entitled to receive disability compensation from the Department of Vet- erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica- tion for it. Y our exclusion under this condi- tion is equal to the amount you would be entitled to receive from the VA. Pension based on years of service. If you receive a disability pension based on years of service, in most cases you must include it in your income. However, if the pension qualifies for the exclusion for a service -connected disa- bility (discussed earlier), don’t include in income the part of your pension that you would have re- ceived if the pension had been based on a per- centage of disability. Y ou must include the rest of your pension in your income. Retroactive VA determination. If you retire from the armed services based on years of service and are later given a retroactive serv- ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- cluded from income up to the amount of VA dis- ability benefits you would have been entitled to receive. Y ou can claim a refund of any tax paid on the excludable amount (subject to the statute of limitations) by filing an amended return on Form 1040 -X for each previous year during the retroactive period. Y ou must include with each Form 1040 -X a copy of the official VA determi- nation letter granting the retroactive benefit. The letter must show the amount withheld and the effective date of the benefit. If you receive a lump -sum disability sever- ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance benefit from your income. However, you must include in your income any lump -sum readjust- ment or other nondisability severance payment you received on release from active duty, even if you’re later given a retroactive disability rating by the VA. Special period of limitation. In most ca- ses, under the period of limitation, a claim for credit or refund must be filed within 3 years from the time a return was filed or 2 years from the time the tax was paid. However, if you receive a retroactive service -connected disability rating determination, the period of limitation is exten- ded by a 1 -year period beginning on the date of the determination. This 1 -year extended period applies to claims for credit or refund filed after June 17, 2008, and doesn’t apply to any tax year that began more than 5 years before the date of the determination. Terrorist attack or military action. Don’t in- clude in your income disability payments you re- ceive for injuries incurred as a direct result of a terrorist attack or military action directed against the United States (or its allies), whether outside or within the United States or from military ac- tion. See Pub. 3920 and Pub. 907 for more in- formation. Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts Long- term care insurance contracts in most ca- ses are treated as accident and health insur- ance contracts. Amounts you receive from them Page 55 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 53 --- Page 56 --- (other than policyholder dividends or premium refunds) in most cases are excludable from in- come as amounts received for personal injury or sickness. T o claim an exclusion for payments made on a per diem or other periodic basis un- der a long -term care insurance contract, you must file Form 8853 with your return. A long- term care insurance contract is an in- surance contract that only provides coverage for qualified long -term care services. The con- tract must: •Be guaranteed renewable; •Not provide for a cash surrender value or other money that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or borrowed; •Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the death of the insured or complete sur- render or cancellation of the contract, and dividends under the contract, may only be used to reduce future premiums or in- crease future benefits; and •In most cases, not pay or reimburse expen- ses incurred for services or items that would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex- cept where Medicare is a secondary payer or the contract makes per diem or other periodic payments without regard to ex- penses. Qualified long -term care services. Qualified long-term care services are: •Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re- habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care services; and •Required by a chronically ill individual and provided pursuant to a plan of care prescri- bed by a licensed health care practitioner. Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill indi- vidual is one who has been certified by a li- censed health care practitioner within the previ- ous 12 months as one of the following. •An individual who, for at least 90 days, is unable to perform at least two activities of daily living without substantial assistance due to loss of functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eating, toileting, transfer- ring, bathing, dressing, and continence. •An individual who requires substantial su- pervision to be protected from threats to health and safety due to severe cognitive impairment. Limit on exclusion. Y ou can generally exclude from gross income up to $410 a day for 2024. See Limit on exclusion , under Long- T erm Care Insurance Contracts , under Sickness and Injury Benefits in Pub. 525 for more information. Workers' Compensation Amounts you receive as workers' compensation for an occupational sickness or injury are fully exempt from tax if they’re paid under a workers' compensation act or a statute in the nature of a workers' compensation act. The exemption also applies to your survivors. The exemption, how- ever, doesn’t apply to retirement plan benefits you receive based on your age, length of serv- ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you retired because of an occupational sickness or injury. If part of your workers' compensation reduces your social security or equiva- lent railroad retirement benefits re- ceived, that part is considered social security (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and may be taxable. For more information, see Pub. 915, Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits. Return to work. If you return to work after qualifying for workers' compensation, salary payments you receive for performing light duties are taxable as wages. Other Sickness and Injury Benefits In addition to disability pensions and annuities, you may receive other payments for sickness or injury. Railroad sick pay. Payments you receive as sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In- surance Act are taxable and you must include them in your income. However, don’t include them in your income if they’re for an on -the-job injury. If you received income because of a disabil- ity, see Disability Pensions , earlier. Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA). Payments received under this Act for personal injury or sickness, including payments to beneficiaries in case of death, aren’t taxable. However, you’re taxed on amounts you receive under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45 days while a claim is being decided. Report this income as wages. Also, pay for sick leave while a claim is being processed is taxable and must be included in your income as wages. If part of the payments you receive un- der FECA reduces your social security or equivalent railroad retirement bene- fits received, that part is considered social se- curity (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and may be taxable. See Pub. 554 for more in- formation. Other compensation. Many other amounts you receive as compensation for sickness or in- jury aren’t taxable. These include the following amounts. •Compensatory damages you receive for physical injury or physical sickness, whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic payments. •Benefits you receive under an accident or health insurance policy on which either you paid the premiums or your employer paid the premiums but you had to include them in your income. •Disability benefits you receive for loss of in- come or earning capacity as a result of in- juries under a no-fault car insurance policy. •Compensation you receive for permanent loss or loss of use of a part or function of your body, or for your permanent disfigure- ment. This compensation must be based only on the injury and not on the period of CAUTION! CAUTION!your absence from work. These benefits aren’t taxable even if your employer pays for the accident and health plan that pro- vides these benefits. Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- bursement for medical care is generally not tax- able. However, it may reduce your medical ex- pense deduction. For more information, see Pub. 502. 6. Interest Income Reminders Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. citi- zen with interest income from sources outside the United States (foreign income), you must re- port that income on your tax return unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re- side inside or outside the United States and whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the foreign payer. Automatic 6 -month extension. If you receive your Form 1099 reporting your interest income late and you need more time to file your tax re- turn, you can request a 6 -month extension of time to file. See Automatic Extension in chap- ter 1. Children who have unearned income. See Form 8615 and its instructions for the rules and rates that apply to certain children with un- earned income. Introduction This chapter discusses the following topics. •Different types of interest income. •What interest is taxable and what interest is nontaxable. •When to report interest income. •How to report interest income on your tax return. In general, any interest you receive or that is credited to your account and can be withdrawn is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule are discussed later in this chapter. Y ou may be able to deduct expenses you have in earning this income on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See Money borrowed to invest in certificate of de- posit , later, and chapter 12 .Page 56 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 54 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 57 --- Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 525 T axable and Nontaxable Income 537 Installment Sales 550 Investment Income and Expenses 555 Community Property 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount (OID) Instruments Form (and Instructions) 1040 U.S. Individual Income T ax Return 1040-SR U.S. Income T ax Return for Seniors Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and Ordinary Dividends Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) Beneficiary's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S) Shareholder's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. W-9 Request for T axpayer Identification Number and Certification 1099 General Instructions for Certain Information Returns 1099-INT Interest Income 1099-DIV Dividends and Distributions 1099-OID Original Issued Discount 1099-R Distributions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc. 3115 Application for Change in Accounting Method 6251 Alternative Minimum T ax — Individuals 8615 T ax for Certain Children Who Have Unearned Income 8814 Parents' Election T o Report Child's Interest and Dividends 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989 For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . General Information A few items of general interest are covered here. 525 537 550 555 1212 1040 1040-SR Schedule A (Form 1040) Schedule B (Form 1040) Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S) W-9 1099 1099-INT 1099-DIV 1099-OID 1099-R 3115 6251 8615 8814 8815Recordkeeping. Y ou should keep a list showing sources of interest income and interest amounts received during the year. Also, keep the forms you receive showing your interest income (Forms 1099 -INT , for example) as an important part of your re- cords. Tax on unearned income of certain chil- dren. Part of a child's 2024 unearned income may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If so, Form 8615 must be completed and attached to the child's tax return. If not, Form 8615 isn't required and the child's income is taxed at his or her own tax rate. Some parents can choose to include the child's interest and dividends on the parent's re- turn. If you can, use Form 8814 for this purpose. For more information about the tax on un- earned income of children and the parents' election, go to Form 8615 . Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest you receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is generally taxable income. Y ou should receive a Schedule K -1 (Form 1041) from the fiduciary. Y our copy of Schedule K -1 (Form 1041) and its instructions will tell you where to report the in- come on your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Taxpayer identification number (TIN). Y ou must give your name and TIN (either a social security number (SSN), an employer identifica- tion number (EIN), an adoption taxpayer identifi- cation number (ATIN), or an individual tax iden- tification number (ITIN)) to any person required by federal tax law to make a return, statement, or other document that relates to you. This in- cludes payers of interest. If you don't give your TIN to the payer of interest, the payer will gener- ally be required to backup withhold on the inter- est payments at a rate of 24%, and you may also be subject to a penalty. Use Form W -9 to provide the necessary information. See Form W-9 and its instructions. TIN for joint account. Generally, if the funds in a joint account belong to one person, list that person's name first on the account and give that person's TIN to the payer. (For infor- mation on who owns the funds in a joint ac- count, see Joint accounts , later.) If the joint ac- count contains combined funds, give the TIN of the person whose name is listed first on the ac- count. These rules apply to both joint ownership by a married couple and to joint ownership by other individuals. For example, if you open a joint savings account with your child using funds belonging to the child, list the child's name first on the account and give the child's TIN. Form W -9 and its instructions provide: If this Form W -9 is for a joint account (other than an account maintained by a foreign financial insti- tution (FFI)), list first, and then circle, the name of the person or entity whose number you en- tered in Form W -9, Part I. If you are providing Form W -9 to an FFI to document a joint ac- count, each holder of the account that is a U.S. person must provide a Form W -9. See Form W-9 and its instructions. Custodian account for your child. If your child is the actual owner of an account that is recorded in your name as custodian for the child, give the child's TIN to the payer. For RECORDSexample, you must give your child's SSN to the payer of interest on an account owned by your child, even though the interest is paid to you as custodian. Penalty for failure to supply TIN. If you don't give your TIN to the payer of interest, you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure to supply SSN under Penalties in chapter 1. Backup with- holding may also apply. Backup withholding. Y our interest income is generally not subject to regular withholding. However, it may be subject to backup withhold- ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the income. Under backup withholding, the payer of interest must withhold, as income tax, on the amount you are paid, by applying the appropri- ate withholding rate. The current rate is 24%. Withholding is required only if there is a condi- tion for backup withholding, such as failing to provide your TIN to the payer or failing to certify your TIN under penalties of perjury, if required. Backup withholding may also be required if the IRS has determined that you underreported your interest or dividend income. For more infor- mation, see Backup Withholding in chapter 4. Reporting backup withholding. If backup withholding is deducted from your interest in- come, the amount withheld will be reported on your Form 1099 -INT . The Form 1099 -INT will show any backup withholding as “Federal in- come tax withheld.” Joint accounts. If two or more persons hold property (such as a savings account or bond) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or ten- ants in common, each person's share of any in- terest from the property is determined by local law. Income from property given to a child. Property you give as a parent to your child un- der the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law becomes the child's property. Income from the property is taxable to the child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal obligation to support the child is taxable to the parent or guardian having that legal obligation. Savings account with parent as trustee. Interest income from a savings account opened for a minor child, but placed in the name and subject to the order of the parents as trustees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the state in which the child resides, both of the fol- lowing are true. •The savings account legally belongs to the child. •The parents aren't legally permitted to use any of the funds to support the child. Form 1099 -INT. Interest income is generally reported to you on Form 1099 -INT , or a similar statement, by banks, savings and loans, and other payers of interest. This form shows you the interest income you received during the year. Keep this form for your records. Y ou don't have to attach it to your tax return. Report on your tax return the total interest in- come you receive for the tax year. See the Form 1099- INT Instructions for Recipient to see whether you need to adjust any of the amounts reported to you.Page 57 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 6 Interest Income 55 --- Page 58 --- Interest not reported on Form 1099 -INT. Even if you don't receive a Form 1099 -INT , you must still report all of your interest income. For example, you may receive distributive shares of interest from partnerships or S corporations. This interest is reported to you on Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S). Nominees. Generally, if someone receives interest as a nominee for you, that person must give you a Form 1099 -INT showing the interest received on your behalf. If you receive a Form 1099 -INT and interest as a nominee for another person, see the dis- cussion on nominee distributions under How T o Report Interest Income in Pub. 550, chapter 1 or the Schedule B (Form 1040) instructions. Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form 1099- INT that shows an incorrect amount or other incorrect information, you should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The new Form 1099- INT you receive will have the “CORREC- TED” box checked. Form 1099 -OID. Reportable interest income may also be shown on Form 1099 -OID, Original Issue Discount. For more information about amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue Discount (OID) , later in this chapter. The box references discussed below are from the January 2024 revisions of Form 1099 -INT and Form 1099 -DIV . Later revisions may have different box referen- ces. Exempt- interest dividends. Exempt-interest dividends you receive from a mutual fund or other regulated investment company (RIC) aren't included in your taxable income. (How- ever, see Information reporting requirement next.) Exempt -interest dividends should be shown on Form 1099 -DIV , box 12. Y ou don't re- duce your basis for distributions that are ex- empt-interest dividends. Information reporting requirement. Al- though exempt-interest dividends aren't taxable, you must show them on your tax return if you have to file. This is an information reporting re- quirement and doesn't change the exempt-inter- est dividends into taxable income. Note. Exempt- interest dividends paid by a mutual fund or other RIC on specified private activity bonds may be subject to the alternative minimum tax (AMT). The exempt -interest divi- dends subject to the AMT should be shown on Form 1099 -DIV , box 13. See Alternative Mini- mum T ax (AMT) in chapter 13 for more informa- tion. Pub. 550, chapter 1 contains a discussion on private activity bonds under State or Local Government Obligations . Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- ance dividends left on deposit with the Depart- ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) isn't taxable. This includes interest paid on dividends on conver- ted United States Government Life Insurance and on National Service Life Insurance policies. Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). Interest on a Roth IRA generally isn't taxable. In- terest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Y ou generally don't include interest earned in an IRA CAUTION!in your income until you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chapter 9 . Taxable Interest—General T axable interest includes interest you receive from bank accounts, loans you make to others, and other sources. The following are some sources of taxable interest. Dividends that are actually interest. Certain distributions commonly called dividends are ac- tually interest. Y ou must report as interest so-called dividends on deposits or on share ac- counts in: •Cooperative banks, •Credit unions, •Domestic building and loan associations, •Domestic savings and loan associations, •Federal savings and loan associations, and •Mutual savings banks. The “dividends” will be shown as interest in- come on Form 1099-INT . Money market funds. Money market funds pay dividends and are offered by nonbank fi- nancial institutions, such as mutual funds and stock brokerage houses. Generally, amounts you receive from money market funds should be reported as dividends, not as interest. Certificates of deposit and other deferred interest accounts. If you buy a certificate of deposit or open a deferred interest account, in- terest may be paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less during the term of the account. Y ou must generally include this interest in your income when you actually receive it or are entitled to re- ceive it without paying a substantial penalty. The same is true for accounts that mature in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount (OID) , later. Interest subject to penalty for early with- drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred interest account before maturity, you may have to pay a penalty. Y ou must report the total amount of interest paid or credited to your ac- count during the year, without subtracting the penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav- ings in Pub. 550, chapter 1 for more information on how to report the interest and deduct the penalty. Money borrowed to invest in certificate of deposit. The interest you pay on money bor- rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet the minimum deposit required for a certificate of deposit from the institution and the interest you earn on the certificate are two separate items. Y ou must report the total interest income you earn on the certificate in your income. If you itemize deductions, you can deduct the interest you pay as investment interest, up to the amount of your net investment income. See In- terest Expenses in Pub. 550, chapter 3. Example. Y ou purchase a $10,000 certifi- cate of deposit by borrowing $5,000 from Bank and adding an additional $5,000 of your funds. The certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2024, but you received only $265, which represented the $575 you earned minus $310 interest charged on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form 1099 -INT for 2024 showing the $575 interest you earned. The bank also gives you a statement showing that you paid $310 of interest for 2024. Y ou must include the $575 in your income. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject to the net investment income limit. Gift for opening account. If you receive non- cash gifts or services for making deposits or for opening an account in a savings institution, you may have to report the value as interest. For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or services valued at more than $10 must be re- ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or more, gifts or services valued at more than $20 must be reported as interest. The value is deter- mined by the cost to the financial institution. Example. Y ou open a savings account at your local bank and deposit $800. The account earns $20 interest. Y ou also receive a $15 cal- culator. If no other interest is credited to your account during the year, the Form 1099 -INT you receive will show $35 interest for the year. Y ou must report $35 interest income on your tax re- turn. Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- surance company that can be withdrawn annu- ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to your account. However, if you can withdraw it only on the anniversary date of the policy (or other specified date), the interest is taxable in the year that date occurs. Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increase in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, ad- vance premiums, or premium deposit funds is interest if it is applied to the payment of premi- ums due on insurance policies or made availa- ble for you to withdraw. U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations issued by any agency or instrumentality of the United States, such as U.S. T reasury bills, notes, and bonds, is taxable for federal income tax purposes. Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receive on tax refunds is taxable income. Interest on condemnation award. If the con- demning authority pays you interest to compen- sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the interest is taxable. Installment sale payments. If a contract for the sale or exchange of property provides for deferred payments, it also usually provides for interest payable with the deferred payments. Generally, that interest is taxable when you re- ceive it. If little or no interest is provided for in a deferred payment contract, part of each pay- ment may be treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 537. Interest on annuity contract. Accumulated interest on an annuity contract you sell before its maturity date is taxable.Page 58 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 56 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 59 --- Usurious interest. Usurious interest is interest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as in- terest unless state law automatically changes it to a payment on the principal. Interest income on frozen deposits. Exclude from your gross income interest on frozen de- posits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the year, you can't withdraw any part of the deposit because: •The financial institution is, or may become, bankrupt or insolvent, or •The state where the institution is located has placed limits on withdrawals because other financial institutions in the state are bankrupt or insolvent. The amount of interest you must exclude is the interest that was credited on the frozen de- posits minus the sum of: •The net amount you withdrew from these deposits during the year, and •The amount you could have withdrawn as of the end of the year (not reduced by any penalty for premature withdrawals of a time deposit). If you receive a Form 1099 -INT for interest in- come on deposits that were frozen at the end of 2024, see Frozen deposits under How T o Re- port Interest Income in Pub. 550, chapter 1 for information about reporting this interest income exclusion on your tax return. The interest you exclude is treated as credi- ted to your account in the following year. Y ou must include it in income in the year you can withdraw it. Example. $100 of interest was credited on your frozen deposit during the year. Y ou with- drew $80 but couldn't withdraw any more as of the end of the year. Y ou must include $80 in your income and exclude $20 from your income for the year. Y ou must include the $20 in your in- come for the year you can withdraw it. Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a dis- count when interest has been defaulted or when the interest has accrued but hasn't been paid, the transaction is described as trading a bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest isn't in- come and isn't taxable as interest if paid later. When you receive a payment of that interest, it is a return of capital that reduces the remaining cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues after the date of purchase, however, is taxable interest income for the year it is received or ac- crued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , later, for more information. Below-market loans. Generally, a “below-mar- ket loan” means any loan if (a) in the case of a gift or demand loan, interest is payable on the loan at a rate less than the applicable federal rate, or (b) in the case of a term loan, the amount loaned exceeds the present value (us- ing a discount rate equal to the applicable fed- eral rate) of all payments due under the loan. (See Code section 7872 for details.) Section 7872 applies to certain below -market loans, in- cluding gift loans, compensation -related loans, and corporation -shareholder loans. (See Code section 7872(c).) If you are the lender of a be- low-market loan, you may have additional inter-est income. See Below- Market Loans in Pub. 550, chapter 1 for more information. U.S. Savings Bonds This section provides tax information on U.S. savings bonds. It explains how to report the in- terest income on these bonds and how to treat transfers of these bonds. U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi- viduals include Series EE bonds and Series I bonds. For information about U.S. savings bonds, go to T reasuryDirect.gov/ savings-bonds/ . If you prefer, write to: T reasury Retail Securities Services P .O. Box 9150 Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150 Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac- crual method of accounting, you must report in- terest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it ac- crues. Y ou can't postpone reporting interest until you receive it or until the bonds mature. Ac- crual methods of accounting are explained in chapter 1 under Accounting Methods . Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash method of accounting, as most individual tax- payers do, you generally report the interest on U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. The cash method of accounting is explained in chapter 1 under Accounting Methods . But see Reporting options for cash method taxpayers , later. Series H and HH bonds. The United States T reasury sold HH savings bonds from 1980 through August 2004. HH savings bonds earn interest for up to 20 years. So the last HH bonds will stop earning interest in 2024. (See T reasuryDirect.gov/savings-bonds/hh-bonds/ .) Certain HH bonds weren’t available for cash only. T o buy those HH bonds, you had to trade in another security you had bought earlier. In making the exchange, you may have used inter- est the original security had earned to help pay for the HH bond. If you used an old bond to buy more than one HH bond, the interest you used to buy the bonds was divided proportionately among the HH bonds. Y ou had a choice then for the tax on that interest: pay it then, or wait and pay it later (defer it). Interest that you decided to pay later is “deferred interest.” If your HH bond has deferred interest, you see the amount iden- tified on the front of the bond. Y ou don't have to report deferred interest on your federal income tax return until you are filing your return for the year in which the first of these events occurs: you cash the HH bond; the HH bond stops earning interest; the HH bond is reissued to show a change in ownership that is a taxable event. (See T reasuryDirect.gov/savings- bonds/hh-bonds/hh-bonds-tax-information .) Series H bonds were issued before 1980. All Series H bonds have matured and are no longer earning interest. In addition to the twice -a-year interest pay- ments, most H/HH bonds have a deferred inter- est component. The reporting of this as income is addressed later in this chapter. Series EE and Series I bonds. Interest on these bonds is payable when you redeem the bonds. The difference between the purchase price and the redemption value is taxable inter- est. Series E and EE bonds. Series E bonds were issued before July 1980. All Series E bonds have matured and are no longer earning interest. Series EE bonds were first offered in January 1980 and have a maturity period of 30 years; they were offered in paper (definitive) form until 2012. Paper Series EE and Series E bonds were issued at a discount and increase in value as they earn interest. Electronic (book- entry) Series EE bonds were first offered in 2003; they are issued at face value and in- crease in value as they earn interest. For all Series E and Series EE bonds, the purchase price plus all accrued interest is payable to you at redemption. Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first of- fered in 1998. These are inflation -indexed bonds issued at face value with a maturity pe- riod of 30 years. Series I bonds increase in value as they earn interest. The face value plus all accrued interest is payable to you at redemp- tion. Reporting options for cash method tax- payers. If you use the cash method of report- ing income, you can report the interest on Ser- ies EE and Series I bonds in either of the following ways. 1.Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest until the earlier of the year you cash or dis- pose of the bonds or the year they mature. (However, see Savings bonds traded , later.) 2.Method 2. Choose to report the increase in redemption value as interest each year. Y ou must use the same method for all Series EE and Series I bonds you own. If you don't choose method 2 by reporting the increase in redemp- tion value as interest each year, you must use method 1. If you plan to cash your bonds in the same year you will pay for higher edu- cation expenses, you may want to use method 1 because you may be able to exclude the interest from your income. T o learn how, see Education Savings Bond Program , later. Change from method 1. If you want to change your method of reporting the interest from method 1 to method 2, you can do so with- out permission from the IRS. In the year of change, you must report all interest accrued to date and not previously reported for all your bonds. Once you choose to report the interest each year, you must continue to do so for all Series EE and Series I bonds you own and for any you get later, unless you request permission to change, as explained next. Change from method 2. T o change from method 2 to method 1, you must request TIPPage 59 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 6 Interest Income 57 --- Page 60 --- permission from the IRS. Permission for the change is automatically granted if you send the IRS a statement that meets all the following re- quirements. 1.Y ou have typed or printed the following number at the top: “131.” 2.It includes your name and social security number under “131.” 3.It includes the year of change (both the be- ginning and ending dates). 4.It identifies the savings bonds for which you are requesting this change. 5.It includes your agreement to: a.Report all interest on any bonds ac- quired during or after the year of change when the interest is realized upon disposition, redemption, or final maturity, whichever is earliest; and b.Report all interest on the bonds ac- quired before the year of change when the interest is realized upon dis- position, redemption, or final maturity, whichever is earliest, with the excep- tion of the interest reported in prior tax years. Y ou must attach this statement to your tax return for the year of change, which you must file by the due date (including extensions). Y ou can have an automatic extension of 6 months from the due date of your return for the year of change (excluding extensions) to file the statement with an amended return. On the statement, type or print “Filed pursuant to sec- tion 301. 9100- 2.” T o get this extension, you must have filed your original return for the year of the change by the due date (including exten- sions). Instead of filing this statement, you can re- quest permission to change from method 2 to method 1 by filing Form 3115, Application for Change in Accounting Method. In that case, fol- low the form instructions for an automatic change. No user fee is required. Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in the names of co -owners, such as you and your child or you and your spouse, interest on the bond is generally taxable to the co -owner who bought the bond. One co -owner's funds used. If you used your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax on the interest. This is true even if you let the other co -owner redeem the bond and keep all the proceeds. Under these circumstances, the co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a Form 1099 -INT at the time of redemption and must provide you with another Form 1099 -INT showing the amount of interest from the bond taxable to you. The co -owner who redeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee distribu- tions under How T o Report Interest Income in Pub. 550, chapter 1 for more information about how a person who is a nominee reports interest income belonging to another person. Both co -owners' funds used. If you and the other co -owner each contribute part of the bond's purchase price, the interest is generally taxable to each of you, in proportion to the amount each of you paid. Community property. If you and your spouse live in a community property state and hold bonds as community property, one -half of the interest is considered received by each of you. If you file separate returns, each of you must generally report one -half of the bond inter- est. For more information about community property, see Pub. 555. Table 6-1. These rules are also shown in T a- ble 6 -1. Ownership transferred. If you bought Series EE or Series I bonds entirely with your own funds and had them reissued in your co -owner's name or beneficiary's name alone, you must in- clude in your gross income for the year of reis- sue all interest that you earned on these bonds and have not previously reported. But, if the bonds were reissued in your name alone, you don't have to report the interest accrued at that time. This same rule applies when bonds (other than bonds held as community property) are transferred between spouses or incident to di- vorce. Purchased jointly. If you and a co -owner each contributed funds to buy Series EE or Ser- ies I bonds jointly and later have the bonds reis- sued in the co -owner's name alone, you must include in your gross income for the year of reis- sue your share of all the interest earned on the bonds that you have not previously reported. The former co -owner doesn't have to include in gross income at the time of reissue his or her share of the interest earned that was not repor- ted before the transfer. This interest, however, as well as all interest earned after the reissue, is income to the former co-owner. This income -reporting rule also applies when a new co -owner purchases your share of the bond and the bonds are reissued in the name of your former co -owner and a new co-owner. But the new co -owner will report only his or her share of the interest earned after the transfer. If bonds that you and a co -owner bought jointly are reissued to each of you separately in the same proportion as your contribution to the purchase price, neither you nor your co -owner has to report at that time the interest earned be- fore the bonds were reissued.Example 1. Y ou and your spouse each spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 Series EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you and your spouse as co -owners. Y ou both post- pone reporting interest on the bond. Y ou later have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one in your spouse's name. At that time, neither you nor your spouse has to re- port the interest earned to the date of reissue. Example 2. Y ou bought a $1,000 Series EE savings bond entirely with your own funds. The bond was issued to you and your spouse as co-owners. Y ou both postpone reporting interest on the bond. Y ou later have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one in your spouse's name. Y ou must report half the interest earned to the date of reissue. Transfer to a trust. If you own Series EE or Series I bonds and transfer them to a trust, giv- ing up all rights of ownership, you must include in your income for that year the interest earned to the date of transfer if you have not already re- ported it. However, if you are considered the owner of the trust and if the increase in value both before and after the transfer continues to be taxable to you, you can continue to defer re- porting the interest earned each year. Y ou must include the total interest in your income in the year you cash or dispose of the bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, whichever is ear- lier. The same rules apply to previously unrepor- ted interest on Series EE or Series E bonds if the transfer to a trust consisted of Series HH bonds you acquired in a trade for the Series EE or Series E bonds. See Savings bonds traded , later. Decedents. The manner of reporting interest income on Series EE or Series I bonds, after the death of the owner (decedent), depends on the accounting and income -reporting methods pre- viously used by the decedent. This is explained in Pub. 550, chapter 1. Savings bonds traded. Prior to September 2004, you could trade (exchange) Series E or EE bonds for Series H or HH bonds. At the time of the trade, you had the choice to postpone (defer) reporting the interest earned on your Series E or EE bonds until the Series H or HH bonds received in the trade were redeemed or matured. Any cash you received in the transac- tion was income up to the amount of the interest that had accrued on the Series E or EE bonds. The amount of income that you chose to post- pone reporting was recorded on the face of the Series H or HH bonds as “Deferred Interest”; this amount is also equal to the difference be- tween the redemption value of the Series H or HH bonds and your cost. Y our cost is the sum of the amount you paid for the exchanged Series E or EE bonds plus any amount you had to pay at the time of the transaction. Example. Y ou traded Series EE bonds (on which you postponed reporting the interest) for $2,500 in Series HH bonds and $223 in cash. Y ou reported the $223 as taxable income on your tax return. At the time of the trade, the Ser- ies EE bonds had accrued interest of $523 and a redemption value of $2,723. Y ou hold the Ser- ies HH bonds until maturity, when you receive T able 6-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by... you buy a bond in your name and the name of another person as co-owners, using only your own fundsyou. you buy a bond in the name of another person, who is the sole owner of the bondthe person for whom you bought the bond. you and another person buy a bond as co-owners, each contributing part of the purchase priceboth you and the other co-owner, in proportion to the amount each paid for the bond. you and your spouse, who live in a community property state, buy a bond that is community propertyyou and your spouse. If you file separate returns, both you and your spouse generally report one-half of the interest.Page 60 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 58 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 61 --- $2,500. Y ou must report $300 as interest in- come in the year of maturity. This is the differ- ence between their redemption value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the amount you paid for the Series EE bonds). It is also the difference between the accrued interest of $523 on the Series EE bonds and the $223 cash received on the trade. Note. The $300 amount that is reportable upon redemption or maturity may be found re- corded on the face of the Series HH bond as “Deferred Interest.” If more than one Series HH bond is received in the exchange, the total amount of interest postponed/deferred in the transaction is divided proportionately among the Series HH bonds. Choice to report interest in year of trade. Y ou can choose to treat all of the previously un- reported accrued interest on the Series EE bonds traded for Series HH bonds as income in the year of the trade. If you made this choice, it is treated as a change from method 1. See Change from method 1 , earlier. If you choose to report the interest, then the “Deferred Interest” notation on the face of the Series HH bonds re- ceived in the trade will be $0 or blank. Form 1099- INT for U.S. savings bonds inter- est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other payer that redeems it must give you a Form 1099- INT if the interest part of the payment you receive is $10 or more. Form 1099 -INT , box 3 should show the interest as the difference be- tween the amount you received and the amount paid for the bond. However, your Form 1099- INT may show more interest than you have to include on your income tax return. For example, this may happen if any of the following are true. •Y ou chose to report the increase in the re- demption value of the bond each year. The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT won't be reduced by amounts previously included in income. •Y ou received the bond from a decedent. The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT won't be reduced by any interest reported by the decedent before death, or on the decedent's final return, or by the estate on the estate's income tax return. •Ownership of the bond was transferred. The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT won't be reduced by interest that accrued before the transfer. Note. This is true for paper bonds, but the T reasury reporting process for elec- tronic bonds is more refined —if T reasury is aware that the transfer of an electronic sav- ings bond is a reportable event, then the transferor will receive a Form 1099 -INT for the year of the transfer for the interest ac- crued up to the time of the transfer; when the transferee later disposes of the bond (redemption, maturity, or further transfer), the transferee will receive a Form 1099 -INT reduced by the amount reported to the transferor at the time of the original trans- fer. •Y ou were named as a co-owner, and the other co-owner contributed funds to buy the bond. The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT won't be reduced by the amount you received as nominee for the other co-owner. (See Co-owners , earlier in this chapter, for more information about the re- porting requirements.) •Y ou received the bond in a taxable distribu- tion from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT won't be reduced by the interest portion of the amount taxable as a distribu- tion from the plan and not taxable as inter- est. (This amount is generally shown on Form 1099-R for the year of distribution.) For more information on including the cor- rect amount of interest on your return, see How T o Report Interest Income , later. Pub. 550 in- cludes examples showing how to report these amounts. Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex- empt from state and local taxes. Education Savings Bond Program Y ou may be able to exclude from income all or part of the interest you receive on the redemp- tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- penses during the same year. This exclusion is known as the Education Savings Bond Pro- gram. Y ou don't qualify for this exclusion if your fil- ing status is married filing separately. Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified U.S. savings bond is a Series EE bond issued after 1989 or a Series I bond. The bond must be issued either in your name (sole owner) or in your and your spouse's names (co -owners). Y ou must be at least 24 years old before the bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought by a parent and issued in the name of his or her child under age 24 doesn't qualify for the exclu- sion by the parent or child. The issue date of a bond may be ear- lier than the date the bond is pur- chased because the issue date as- signed to a bond is the first day of the month in which it is purchased. Beneficiary. Y ou can designate any individual (including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond. Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- sion, the IRS will check it by using bond re- demption information from the Department of the T reasury. Qualified expenses. Qualified higher edu- cation expenses are tuition and fees required for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom you claim an exemption) to attend an eli- gible educational institution. Qualified expenses include any contribution you make to a qualified tuition program or to a Coverdell education savings account (ESA). Qualified expenses don't include expenses for room and board or for courses involving TIP CAUTION!sports, games, or hobbies that aren't part of a degree- or certificate-granting program. Eligible educational institutions. These institutions include most public, private, and nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational schools that are accredited and eligible to par- ticipate in student aid programs run by the U.S. Department of Education. Reduction for certain benefits. Y ou must reduce your qualified higher education expen- ses by all of the following tax-free benefits. 1.T ax-free part of scholarships and fellow- ships (see Scholarships and fellowships in chapter 8). 2.Expenses used to figure the tax-free por- tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA. 3.Expenses used to figure the tax-free por- tion of distributions from a qualified tuition program. 4.Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or inheritances) received for educational ex- penses, such as: a.Veterans' educational assistance ben- efits, b.Qualified tuition reductions, or c.Employer-provided educational assis- tance. 5.Any expense used in figuring the Ameri- can opportunity and lifetime learning cred- its. Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (interest and principal) from the qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem during the year aren't more than your adjusted qualified higher education expenses for the year, you may be able to exclude all of the interest. If the pro- ceeds are more than the expenses, you may be able to exclude only part of the interest. T o determine the excludable amount, multi- ply the interest part of the proceeds by a frac- tion. The numerator of the fraction is the quali- fied higher education expenses you paid during the year. The denominator of the fraction is the total proceeds you received during the year. Example. In January 2024, Mark and Joan, a married couple, cashed qualified Series EE U.S. savings bonds with a total denomination of $10,000 that they bought in January 2008 for $5,000. They received proceeds of $8,052, rep- resenting principal of $5,000 and interest of $3,052. In 2024, they paid $4,000 of their daughter's college tuition. They aren't claiming an education credit for that amount, and their daughter doesn't have any tax -free educational assistance. They can exclude $1,516. 15 ($3,052 × ($4,000 ÷ $8,052)) of interest in 2024. They must include the remaining $1,535. 85 ($3,052 − $1,516.15) interest in gross income. U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds T reasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts (obligations) of the U.S. Government. Taxation of interest. Interest income from T reasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to Page 61 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 6 Interest Income 59 --- Page 62 --- federal income tax but is exempt from all state and local income taxes. Y ou should receive a Form 1099 -INT showing the interest paid to you for the year in box 3. Treasury bills. These bills generally have a 4-week, 8-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity period. They are generally issued at a discount in the amount of $100 and multiples of $100. The difference between the discounted price you pay for the bills and the face value you receive at maturity is interest income. Generally, you report this interest income when the bill is paid at maturity. If you paid a premium for a bill (more than the face value), you generally report the premium as a section 171 deduction when the bill is paid at maturity. If you reinvest your T reasury bill at its matur- ity in a new T reasury bill, note, or bond, you will receive payment for the difference between the proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the new T reasury security. However, you must re- port the full amount of the interest income on each of your T reasury bills at the time it reaches maturity. Treasury notes and bonds. T reasury notes generally have maturity periods of more than 1 year, ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods for T reasury bonds are generally longer than 10 years. Both are generally issued in denomina- tions of $100 to $1,000,000 and generally pay interest every 6 months. Generally, you report this interest for the year paid. For more informa- tion, see U.S. T reasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in Pub. 550, chapter 1. For other information on T reasury notes or bonds, write to: T reasury Retail Securities Services P .O. Box 9150 Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150 Or, on the Internet, go to T reasuryDirect.gov/marketable- securities/ . For information on Series EE, Series I, and Series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings Bonds , earlier. Treasury inflation -protected securities (TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount adjusted to take into account inflation and defla- tion. For the tax treatment of these securities, see Inflation- Indexed Debt Instruments under Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 550, chapter1. Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates If you sell a bond between interest payment dates, part of the sales price represents interest accrued to the date of sale. Y ou must report that part of the sales price as interest income for the year of sale. If you buy a bond between interest payment dates, part of the purchase price represents in- terest accrued before the date of purchase. When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a nontaxable return of your capital investment, rather than as interest income. See Accrued in- terest on bonds under How T o Report Interest Income in Pub. 550, chapter 1 for information on reporting the payment. Insurance Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi- ciary of the insured person are usually not taxa- ble. But if you receive the proceeds in install- ments, you must usually report a part of each installment payment as interest income. For more information about insurance pro- ceeds received in installments, see Pub. 525. Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. See chapter 5 for information on pension and annuity income from nonqualified plans. State or Local Government Obligations Interest on a bond used to finance government operations generally isn't taxable if the bond is issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a ter- ritory of the United States, or any of their politi- cal subdivisions. Bonds issued after 1982 by an Indian tribal government (including tribal economic develop- ment bonds issued after February 17, 2009) are treated as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds is generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of an issue of which substantially all pro- ceeds are to be used in the exercise of any es- sential government function. However, the es- sential government function requirement does not apply to tribal economic development bonds issued after February 17, 2009. See section 7871(f). For information on federally guaranteed bonds, mortgage revenue bonds, arbitrage bonds, private activity bonds, qualified bonds, and tax credit bonds, including whether interest on some of these bonds is taxable, see State or Local Government Obligations in Pub. 550, chapter 1. Information reporting requirement. If you file a tax return, you are required to show any tax-exempt interest you received on your return. T ax- exempt interest paid to you will be reported to you on Form 1099- INT , box 8. This is an infor- mation reporting requirement only. It doesn't change tax-exempt interest to taxable interest. Original Issue Discount (OID) OID is a form of interest. Y ou generally include OID in your income as it accrues over the term of the debt instrument, whether or not you re- ceive any payments from the issuer. A debt instrument generally has OID when the instrument is issued for a price that is less than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID is the difference between the stated redemption price at maturity and the issue price.All debt instruments that pay no interest be- fore maturity are presumed to be issued at a discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example of these instruments. The OID accrual rules generally don't apply to short- term obligations (those with a fixed ma- turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). See Discount on Short-T erm Obligations in Pub. 550, chapter 1. De minimis OID. Y ou can treat the discount as zero if it is less than one -fourth of 1% (0. 0025) of the stated redemption price at maturity multi- plied by the number of full years from the date of original issue to maturity. This small discount is known as de minimis OID. Example 1. Y ou bought a 10 -year bond with a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000, issued at $980 with OID of $20. One- fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10 (the number of full years from the date of original issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except that the bond was issued at $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 dis- count is more than the $25 figured in Exam- ple 1 , you must include the OID in income as it accrues over the term of the bond. Debt instrument bought after original is- sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de mini- mis OID at a premium, the de minimis OID isn't includible in income. If you buy a debt instru- ment with de minimis OID at a discount, the dis- count is reported under the market discount rules. See Market Discount Bonds in Pub. 550, chapter 1. Exceptions to reporting OID as current in- come. The OID rules discussed in this chapter don't apply to the following debt instruments. 1.T ax-exempt obligations. (However, see Stripped tax-exempt obligations under Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Pub. 550, chapter 1.) 2.U.S. savings bonds. 3.Short-term debt instruments (those with a fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year from the date of issue). 4.Loans between individuals if all the follow- ing are true. a.The loan is not made in the course of a trade or business of the lender. b.The amount of the loan, plus the amount of any outstanding prior loans between the same individuals, is $10,000 or less. c.Avoiding any federal tax isn't one of the principal purposes of the loan. 5.A debt instrument purchased at a pre- mium. Form 1099 -OID. Y ou may receive a Form 1099- OID for a debt instrument you own. If you receive a Form 1099 -OID (Rev. 1 -2024), box 1 will show any “Original issue discount for the Page 62 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 60 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 63 --- year”; box 2 will show any “Other periodic inter- est”; and box 8 will show any “Original issue dis- count on U.S. T reasury obligations.” In most cases, you must report the entire amount in Form 1099 -OID, boxes 1, 2, and 8 as interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099 -OID, later in this discussion, for more information. Form 1099 -OID not received. If you had OID for the year but didn't receive a Form 1099 -OID, you may have to figure the correct amount of OID to report on your return. See Pub. 1212 for details on how to figure the correct OID. Nominee. If someone else is the record holder (the registered owner) of an OID instru- ment belonging to you and receives a Form 1099- OID on your behalf, that person must give you a Form 1099-OID. Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099 -OID. Y ou may need to refigure the OID shown in Form 1099 -OID, box 1 or box 8 if either of the following applies. •Y ou bought the debt instrument after its original issue and paid a premium or an ac- quisition premium. •The debt instrument is a stripped bond or a stripped coupon (including certain zero coupon instruments). If you acquired your debt instrument before 2014, your payer is only required to report a gross amount of OID in Form 1099 -OID, box 1 or box 8. See Publication 1212 and Form 1099 -OID for information regarding figuring the correct amount of OID to include on your income tax re- turn. If you acquired your debt instrument after 2013, unless you have informed your payer that you do not want to amortize bond premium, your payer must generally report either (1) a net amount of OID that reflects the offset of OID by the amount of bond premium or acquisition pre- mium amortization for the year, or (2) a gross amount for both the OID and the bond premium or acquisition premium amortization for the year. Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form 1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument or acquired it from another holder during the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , earlier, for information about the treatment of periodic interest that may be shown in Form 1099-OID, box 2 for that instrument. Certificates of deposit (CDs). A CD is a debt instrument. If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must include in income each year a part of the total interest due and re- port it in the same manner as other OID. This also applies to similar deposit arrange- ments with banks, building and loan associa- tions, etc., including: •Time deposits, •Bonus plans, •Savings certificates, •Deferred income certificates, •Bonus savings certificates, and •Growth savings certificates.Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 must generally be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs not in registered form. They aren't issued in the depositor's name and are transferable from one individual to another. Banks must provide the IRS and the person redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT . More information. See Pub. 550, chapter 1 for more information about OID and related topics, such as market discount bonds. When To Report Interest Income When to report your interest income depends on whether you use the cash method or an ac- crual method to report income. Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use the cash method. If you use this method, you generally report your interest income in the year in which you actually or constructively receive it. However, there are special rules for reporting the discount on certain debt instruments. See U.S. Savings Bonds and Original Issue Dis- count (OID) , earlier. Example. On August 31, 2022, you loaned another individual $2,000 at 4% interest, com- pounded annually. Y ou aren't in the business of lending money. The note stated that principal and interest would be due on August 30, 2024. In 2024, you received $2,163.20 ($2,000 princi- pal and $163.20 interest). If you use the cash method, you must include in income on your 2024 return the $163.20 interest you received in that year. Constructive receipt. Y ou constructively re- ceive income when it is credited to your account or made available to you. Y ou don't need to have physical possession of it. For example, you are considered to receive interest, divi- dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac- count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar fi- nancial institution, or interest on life insurance policy dividends left to accumulate, when they are credited to your account and subject to your withdrawal. Y ou constructively receive income on the de- posit or account even if you must: •Make withdrawals in multiples of even amounts; •Give a notice to withdraw before making the withdrawal; •Withdraw all or part of the account to with- draw the earnings; or •Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless the interest you are to receive on an early withdrawal or redemption is substantially less than the interest payable at maturity. Accrual method. If you use an accrual method, you report your interest income when you earn it, whether or not you have received it. Interest is earned over the term of the debt in- strument. Example. If, in the previous example, you use an accrual method, you must include the in- terest in your income as you earn it. Y ou would report the interest as follows: 2022, $26. 67; 2023, $81.06; and 2024, $55.47. Coupon bonds. Interest on bearer bonds with detachable coupons is generally taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and payable. It doesn't matter when you mail the coupon for payment. How To Report Interest Income Generally, you report all your taxable interest in- come on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2b. Schedule B (Form 1040). Y ou must com- plete Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 or 1040 -SR and any of the following apply. 1.Y our taxable interest income is more than $1,500. 2.Y ou are claiming the interest exclusion un- der the Education Savings Bond Program (discussed earlier). 3.Y ou received interest from a seller-fi- nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the property as a home. 4.Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest that includes amounts you reported in a previous tax year. 5.Y ou received, as a nominee, interest that actually belongs to someone else. 6.Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for interest on frozen deposits. 7.Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for interest on a bond you bought between interest payment dates. 8.Y ou are reporting OID in an amount less than the amount shown on Form 1099-OID. 9.Y ou reduce interest income from bonds by amortizable bond premium. In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the amount received from each. If you received a Form 1099 -INT or Form 1099 -OID from a bro- kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer. The box references discussed below are from the January 2024 revisions of Form 1099 -INT and Form 1099 -DIV . Later revisions may have different box referen- ces. Reporting tax -exempt interest. T otal your tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued OID on certain state and municipal bonds, in- cluding zero coupon municipal bonds) reported on Form 1099 -INT , box 8; Form 1099 -OID, box 11; and exempt -interest dividends from a mutual fund or other regulated investment com- pany reported on Form 1099 -DIV , box 12. Add these amounts to any other tax -exempt interest you received. Report the total on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2a. Form 1099 -INT , box 9, and Form 1099 -DIV , box 13, show the tax -exempt interest subject to the AMT on Form 6251. These amounts are al- ready included in the amounts on Form CAUTION!Page 63 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 6 Interest Income 61 --- Page 64 --- 1099- INT , box 8, and Form 1099 -DIV , box 12. Don't add the amounts in Form 1099 -INT , box 9, and Form 1099-DIV , box 13, to, or subtract them from, the amounts on Form 1099 -INT , box 8, and Form 1099-DIV , box 12. Don't report interest from an IRA as tax-exempt interest. Form 1099 -INT. Y our taxable interest income, except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and T reasury obligations, is shown in Form 1099- INT , box 1. Add this amount to any other taxable interest income you received. See the Form 1099 -INT Instructions for Recipient if you have interest from a security acquired at a pre- mium. Y ou must report all of your taxable inter- est income even if you don't receive a Form 1099- INT . Contact your financial institution if you don't receive a Form 1099 -INT by February 15. Y our identifying number may be truncated on any Form 1099-INT you receive. If you forfeited interest income because of the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de- ductible amount will be shown on Form 1099- INT , box 2. See Penalty on early with- drawal of savings in Pub. 550, chapter 1. Form 1099 -INT , box 3 shows the interest in- come you received from U.S. savings bonds, T reasury bills, T reasury notes, and T reasury bonds. Generally, add the amount shown in Form 1099- INT , box 3 to any other taxable inter- est income you received. If part of the amount shown in Form 1099 -INT , box 3 was previously included in your interest income, see U.S. sav- ings bond interest previously reported , later. If you acquired the security at a premium, see the Form 1099-INT Instructions for Recipient. Form 1099-INT , box 4 will contain an amount if you were subject to backup withholding. In- clude the amount from box 4 on Form 1040 or 1040- SR, line 25b (federal income tax with- held). Form 1099 -INT , box 5 shows investment ex- penses. This amount is not deductible. Form 1099 -INT , box 6 shows foreign tax paid. Y ou may be able to claim this tax as a de- duction or a credit on your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. See your tax return instructions. Form 1099 -INT , box 7 shows the foreign country or U.S. territory to which the foreign tax was paid. U.S. savings bond interest previously re- ported. If you received a Form 1099 -INT for U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show interest you don't have to report. See Form 1099 -INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear- lier. On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, report all the interest shown on your Form 1099-INT . Then follow these steps. 1.Several rows above line 2, enter a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1. 2.Below the subtotal, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Reported” and enter amounts previously reported or inter- est accrued before you received the bond. 3.Subtract these amounts from the subtotal and enter the result on line 2. More information. For more information about how to report interest income, see Pub. 550, CAUTION!chapter 1 or the instructions for the form you must file. 7. Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Reminders Lines 1a through 1z on Forms 1040 and 1040-SR. Line 1 was expanded and there are lines 1a through 1z. Some amounts that in prior years were reported on Form 1040, and some amounts reported on Form 1040 -SR, are now reported on Schedule 1. •Scholarships and fellowship grants are now reported on Schedule 1, line 8r. •Pension or annuity from a nonqualified de- ferred compensation plan or a nongovern- mental section 457 plan is now reported on Schedule 1, line 8t. •Wages earned while incarcerated are now reported on Schedule 1, line 8u. Line 6c on Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR. A checkbox was added on line 6c. T axpayers who elect to use the lump -sum election method for their benefits will check this box. See Lump-Sum Election in Pub. 915, Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits, for details. Introduction This chapter explains the federal income tax rules for social security benefits and equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the following topics. •How to figure whether your benefits are taxable. •How to report your taxable benefits. •How to use the Social Security Benefits Worksheet (with examples). •Deductions related to your benefits and how to treat repayments that are more than the benefits you received during the year. Social security benefits include monthly re- tirement, survivor, and disability benefits. They don’t include Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments, which aren’t taxable.Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad em- ployee or beneficiary would have been entitled to receive under the social security system. They are commonly called the social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- fits. If you received these benefits during 2024, you should have received a Form SSA -1099, Social Security Benefit Statement; or Form RRB- 1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire- ment Board. These forms show the amounts re- ceived and repaid, and taxes withheld for the year. Y ou may receive more than one of these forms for the same year. Y ou should add the amounts shown on all the Forms SSA -1099 and Forms RRB- 1099 you receive for the year to de- termine the total amounts received and repaid, and taxes withheld for that year. See the Appen- dix at the end of Pub. 915 for more information. Note. When the term “benefits” is used in this chapter, it applies to both social security benefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. my Social Security account. Social security beneficiaries may quickly and easily obtain in- formation from the SSA's website with a my So- cial Security account to: •Keep track of your earnings and verify them every year, •Get an estimate of your future benefits if you are still working, •Get a letter with proof of your benefits if you currently receive them, •Change your address, •Start or change your direct deposit, •Get a replacement Medicare card, and •Get a replacement Form SSA-1099 for the tax season. For more information and to set up an account, go to SSA.gov/myaccount . What isn’t covered in this chapter. This chapter doesn’t cover the tax rules for the fol- lowing railroad retirement benefits. •Non-social security equivalent benefit (NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits. •Tier 2 benefits. •Vested dual benefits. •Supplemental annuity benefits. For information on these benefits, see Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income. This chapter doesn’t cover the tax rules for social security benefits reported on Form SSA- 1042S, Social Security Benefit Statement; or Form RRB -1042S, Statement for Nonresi- dent Alien Recipients of Payments by the Rail- road Retirement Board. For information about these benefits, see Pub. 519, U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens; and Pub. 915. This chapter also doesn’t cover the tax rules for foreign social security benefits. These bene- fits are taxable as annuities, unless they are ex- empt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social security benefit under a tax treaty.Page 64 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 62 Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPublication 17 (2024) --- Page 65 --- Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information 505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax 519 U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens 575 Pension and Annuity Income 590-A Contributions to Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 915 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Form (and Instructions) 1040-ES Estimated T ax for Individuals SSA-1099 Social Security Benefit Statement RRB-1099 Payments by the Railroad Retirement Board W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Are Any of Your Benefits Taxable? T o find out whether any of your benefits may be taxable, compare the base amount (explained later) for your filing status with the total of: 1.One-half of your benefits; plus 2.All your other income, including tax-ex- empt interest. Exclusions. When making this comparison, don’t reduce your other income by any exclu- sions for: •Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds, •Employer-provided adoption benefits, •Interest on education loans, •Foreign earned income or foreign housing, or •Income earned by bona fide residents of American Samoa or Puerto Rico. Children's benefits. The rules in this chapter apply to benefits received by children. See Who is taxed , later. Figuring total income. T o figure the total of one- half of your benefits plus your other in- come, use Worksheet 7 -1, discussed later. If the total is more than your base amount, part of your benefits may be taxable. If you are married and file a joint return for 2024, you and your spouse must combine your incomes and your benefits to figure whether any of your combined benefits are taxable. Even if your spouse didn’t receive any benefits, you must add your spouse's income to yours to fig- ure whether any of your benefits are taxable. If the only income you received during 2024 was your social security or the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad 501 505 519 575 590-A 915 1040-ES SSA-1099 RRB-1099 W-4V TIPretirement benefits, your benefits generally aren’t taxable and you probably don’t have to file a return. If you have income in addition to your benefits, you may have to file a return even if none of your benefits are taxable. See Do I Have T o File a Return? in chapter 1, earlier; Pub. 501; or your tax return instructions to find out if you have to file a return. Base amount. Y our base amount is: •$25,000 if you are single, head of house- hold, or qualifying surviving spouse; •$25,000 if you are married filing separately and lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024; •$32,000 if you are married filing jointly; or •$0 if you are married filing separately and lived with your spouse at any time during 2024. Worksheet 7 -1. Y ou can use Worksheet 7 -1 to figure the amount of income to compare with your base amount. This is a quick way to check whether some of your benefits may be taxable.Worksheet 7-1. A Quick Way To Check if Your Benefits May Be Taxable Note. If you plan to file a joint income tax return, include your spouse's amounts, if any, on lines A, C, and D. A. Enter the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . Include the full amount of any lump-sum benefit payments received in 2024, for 2024 and earlier years. (If you received more than one form, combine the amounts from box 5 and enter the total.) ....... A. Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop here; none of your benefits are taxable this year. B. Multiply line A by 50% (0.50) ............. B. C. Enter your total income that is taxable (excluding line A), such as pensions, wages, interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. Don’t reduce your income by any deductions, exclusions (listed earlier), or exemptions .......... C. D. Enter any tax-exempt interest income, such as interest on municipal bonds ............. D. E.Add lines B, C, and D .... E. Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base amount for your filing status. If the amount on line E equals or is less than the base amount for your filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this year. If the amount on line E is more than your base amount, some of your benefits may be taxable and you will need to complete Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 (or the Social Security Benefits Worksheet in your tax form instructions). If none of your benefits are taxable, but you must otherwise file a tax return, see Benefits not taxable , later, under How T o Report Y our Benefits . Example. Y ou are over 65 and are filing a single return for 2024 and you received social security benefits during the year. In January 2025, you received a Form SSA -1099 showing net benefits of $1,500 in box 5. Y ou also re- ceived a taxable pension of $16,000 and inter- est income of $700. Y ou didn’t have any tax -ex- empt interest income. Y our benefits aren’t taxable for 2024 because your income, as fig- ured in Worksheet 7 -1, isn’t more than your base amount ($25,000) for single. Even though none of your benefits are taxa- ble, you must file a return for 2024 because your taxable gross income ($17,450) exceeds the minimum filing requirement amount for your fil- ing status.Page 65 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits63 --- Page 66 --- Filled-in Worksheet 7-1. A Quick Way To Check if Your Benefits May Be Taxable Note. If you plan to file a joint income tax return, include your spouse's amounts, if any, on lines A, C, and D. A. Enter the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . Include the full amount of any lump-sum benefit payments received in 2024, for 2024 and earlier years. (If you received more than one form, combine the amounts from box 5 and enter the total.) ....... A. $1,500 Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop here; none of your benefits are taxable this year. B. Multiply line A by 50% (0.50) ............. B. 750 C. Enter your total income that is taxable (excluding line A), such as pensions, wages, interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. Don’t reduce your income by any deductions, exclusions (listed earlier), or exemptions .......... C. 16,700 D. Enter any tax-exempt interest income, such as interest on municipal bonds ............ D. -0- E.Add lines B, C, and D ... E. $17,450 Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base amount for your filing status. If the amount on line E equals or is less than the base amount for your filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this year. If the amount on line E is more than your base amount, some of your benefits may be taxable and you will need to complete Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 (or the Social Security Benefits Worksheet in your tax form instructions). If none of your benefits are taxable, but you otherwise must file a tax return, see Benefits not taxable , later, under How T o Report Y our Benefits . Who is taxed. Benefits are included in the tax- able income (to the extent they are taxable) of the person who has the legal right to receive the benefits. For example, if you and your child re- ceive benefits, but the check for your child is made out in your name, you must use only your part of the benefits to see whether any benefits are taxable to you. One -half of the part that be- longs to your child must be added to your child's other income to see whether any of those bene- fits are taxable to your child. Repayment of benefits. Any repayment of benefits you made during 2024 must be sub- tracted from the gross benefits you received in 2024. It doesn’t matter whether the repayment was for a benefit you received in 2024 or in an earlier year. If you repaid more than the gross benefits you received in 2024, see Repayments More Than Gross Benefits , later.Y our gross benefits are shown in box 3 of Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Y our repayments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5 shows your net benefits for 2024 (box 3 minus box 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure whether any of your benefits are taxable. Tax withholding and estimated tax. Y ou can choose to have federal income tax withheld from your social security benefits and/or the SSEB portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. If you choose to do this, you must complete a Form W-4V . If you don’t choose to have income tax with- held, you may have to request additional with- holding from other income or pay estimated tax during the year. For details, see chapter 4 , ear- lier; Pub. 505; or the Instructions for Form 1040-ES. How To Report Your Benefits If part of your benefits are taxable, you must use Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Reporting on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Report your net benefits (the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA -1099 and Forms RRB- 1099) on line 6a and the taxable part on line 6b. If you are married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, also enter “D” to the right of the word “benefits” on line 6a. Benefits not taxable. Report your net benefits (the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA- 1099 and Forms RRB -1099) on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 6a. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 6b. If you are married fil- ing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, also enter “D” to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a. How Much Is Taxable? If part of your benefits are taxable, how much is taxable depends on the total amount of your benefits and other income. Generally, the higher that total amount, the greater the taxable part of your benefits. Maximum taxable part. Generally, up to 50% of your benefits will be taxable. However, up to 85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of the following situations applies to you. •The total of one-half of your benefits and all your other income is more than $34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filing jointly). •Y ou are married filing separately and lived with your spouse at any time during 2024. Which worksheet to use. A worksheet you can use to figure your taxable benefits is in the Instructions for Form 1040. Y ou can use either that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915, un- less any of the following situations applies to you. 1.Y ou contributed to a traditional individual retirement arrangement (IRA) and you or your spouse is covered by a retirement plan at work. In this situation, you must use the special worksheets in Appendix B of Pub. 590-A to figure both your IRA de- duction and your taxable benefits. 2.Situation 1 doesn’t apply and you take an exclusion for interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoption benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earned income or housing (Form 2555), or for in- come earned in American Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico by bona fide resi- dents. In this situation, you must use Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 to figure your tax- able benefits. 3.Y ou received a lump-sum payment for an earlier year. In this situation, also complete Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub. 915. See Lump -sum election next. Lump-sum election. Y ou must include the tax- able part of a lump -sum (retroactive) payment of benefits received in 2024 in your 2024 in- come, even if the payment includes benefits for an earlier year. Check the box on Form 1040, or Form 1040- SR, line 6c if you elect to use the lump- sum election method for your benefits. If any of your benefits are taxable for 2024 and they include a lump -sum benefit pay- ment that was for an earlier year, you may be able to reduce the taxable amount with the lump- sum election. See Lump- Sum Election in Pub. 915 for details. This type of lump -sum benefit payment shouldn’t be confused with the lump- sum death benefit that both the SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficia- ries. No part of the lump -sum death benefit is subject to tax. Generally, you use your 2024 income to fig- ure the taxable part of the total benefits re- ceived in 2024. However, you may be able to figure the taxable part of a lump -sum payment for an earlier year separately, using your income for the earlier year. Y ou can elect this method if it lowers your taxable benefits. Making the election. If you received a lump- sum benefit payment in 2024 that includes benefits for one or more earlier years, follow the instructions in Pub. 915 under Lump- Sum Elec- tion to see whether making the election will lower your taxable benefits. That discussion also explains how to make the election. Because the earlier year's taxable ben- efits are included in your 2024 income, no adjustment is made to the earlier year's return. Don’t file an amended return for the earlier year. Examples The following are a few examples you can use as a guide to figure the taxable part of your ben- efits. Example 1. Y ou are single and file Form 1040 for 2024. Y ou received the following in- come in 2024. TIP TIP CAUTION!Page 66 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 64 Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPublication 17 (2024) --- Page 67 --- Fully taxable pension ........ $18,600 Wages from part-time job ..... 9,400 T axable interest income ...... 990 T otal .................. $28,990 Y ou also received social security benefits during 2024. The Form SSA -1099 you received in January 2025 shows $5,980 in box 5. T o fig- ure your taxable benefits, you complete the worksheet shown here. Filled-in Worksheet 1. Figuring Your Taxable Benefits 1.Enter the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . Also enter this amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a ....... $5,980 2.Multiply line 1 by 50% (0.50) ....... 2,990 3.Combine the amounts from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, lines 1z, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7, and 8 ................... 28,990 4.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2a ........ -0- 5.Enter the total of any exclusions/ adjustments for: •Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 28), •Foreign earned income or housing (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50), and •Certain income of bona fide residents of American Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto Rico ........ ........ -0- 6.Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 above ... 31,980 7.Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), lines 11 through 20, and 23 and 25 ........ -0- 8.Is the amount on line 7 less than the amount on line 6? No. STOP None of your social security benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b. Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... 31,980 9.If you are: •Married filing jointly, enter $32,000; or •Single, head of household, qualifying surviving spouse, or married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, enter $25,000 .. .. 25,000Note. If you are married filing separately and you lived with your spouse at any time in 2024, skip lines 9 through 16, multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85), and enter the result on line 17. Then, go to line 18. 10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the amount on line 8? No. STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b. If you are married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, be sure you entered “D” to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a. Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... 6,980 11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; or $9,000 if single, head of household, qualifying surviving spouse, or married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024 ..... 9,000 12.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or less, enter -0- ............... -0- 13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 ................. 6,980 14.Multiply line 13 by 50% (0.50) ...... 3,490 15.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 2,990 16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 is zero, enter -0- ............. -0- 17.Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 2,990 18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 5,083 19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b ... $2,990 The amount on line 19 of your worksheet shows that $2,990 of your social security bene- fits are taxable. On line 6a of your Form 1040, you enter your net benefits of $5,980. On line 6b, you enter your taxable benefits of $2,990. Example 2. Casey and Pat Hopkins file a joint return on Form 1040 for 2024. Casey is re- tired and received a fully taxable pension of $15,500. Casey also received social security benefits, and Casey’s Form SSA -1099 for 2024 shows net benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Pat worked during the year and had wages of $14,000. Pat made a deductible payment to Pat’s IRA account of $1,000 and isn’t covered by a retirement plan at work. Casey and Pat have two savings accounts with a total of $250 in taxable interest income. They complete Worksheet 1, shown below, entering $29,750 ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250) on line 3. They find none of Casey's social security benefits are tax- able. On Form 1040, they enter $5,600 on line 6a and -0- on line 6b.Filled-in Worksheet 1. Figuring Your Taxable Benefits 1.Enter the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . Also enter this amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a ....... $5,600 2.Multiply line 1 by 50% (0.50) ... 2,800 3.Combine the amounts from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, lines 1z, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7, and 8 ........ 29,750 4.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2a ............... -0- 5.Enter the total of any exclusions/ adjustments for: •Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 28), •Foreign earned income or housing (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50), and •Certain income of bona fide residents of American Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto Rico ........ ........ -0- 6.Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 above ............... 32,550 7.Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), lines 11 through 20, and 23 and 25 ................. 1,000 8.Is the amount on line 7 less than the amount on line 6? No. STOP None of your social security benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b. Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ............... 31,550 9.If you are: •Married filing jointly, enter $32,000; or •Single, head of household, qualifying surviving spouse, or married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, enter $25,000 .. .. 32,000 Note. If you are married filing separately and you lived with your spouse at any time in 2024, skip lines 9 through 16, multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85), and enter the result on line 17. Then, go to line 18. 10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the amount on line 8? No. STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b. If you are married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, be sure you entered “D” to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a. Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... Page 67 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits65 --- Page 68 --- 11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; or $9,000 if single, head of household, qualifying surviving spouse, or married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024 ..... 12.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or less, enter -0- ............... 13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 ................. 14.Multiply line 13 by 50% (0.50) ...... 15.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 is zero, enter -0- ............. 17.Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b ... Example 3. Jamie and Jessie Johnson file a joint return on Form 1040 for 2024. Jamie is a retired railroad worker and in 2024 received the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retirement bene- fits. Jamie's Form RRB -1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Jessie is a retired government worker and received a fully taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 in taxable interest income plus interest of $200 on a qualified U.S. savings bond. The savings bond interest qualified for the exclusion. They figure their taxable benefits by completing Worksheet 1, shown below. Be- cause they have qualified U.S. savings bond in- terest, they follow the note at the beginning of the worksheet and use the amount from line 2 of their Schedule B (Form 1040) on line 3 of the worksheet instead of the amount from line 2b of their Form 1040. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter $40,500 ($38,000 + $2,500).Filled-in Worksheet 1. Figuring Your Taxable Benefits Before you begin: •If you are married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, enter “D” to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a. •Don’t use this worksheet if you repaid benefits in 2024 and your total repayments (box 4 of Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) were more than your gross benefits for 2024 (box 3 of Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099). None of your benefits are taxable for 2024. For more information, see Repayments More Than Gross Benefits , later. •If you are filing Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, don’t include the amount from line 2b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR on line 3 of this worksheet. Instead, include the amount from Schedule B (Form 1040), line 2. 1.Enter the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . Also enter this amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a ....... $10,000 2.Multiply line 1 by 50% (0.50) ....... 5,000 3.Combine the amounts from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, lines 1z, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7, and 8 ................... 40,500 4.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2a ........ -0- 5.Enter the total of any exclusions/ adjustments for: •Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 28), •Foreign earned income or housing (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50), and •Certain income of bona fide residents of American Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto Rico ........ ........ -0- 6.Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 above ... 45,500 7.Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), lines 11 through 20, and 23 and 25 ........ -0- 8.Is the amount on line 7 less than the amount on line 6? No. STOP None of your social security benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b. Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... 45,500 9.If you are: •Married filing jointly, enter $32,000; or •Single, head of household, qualifying surviving spouse, or married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, enter $25,000 .. .. 32,000Note. If you are married filing separately and you lived with your spouse at any time in 2024, skip lines 9 through 16, multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85), and enter the result on line 17. Then, go to line 18. 10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the amount on line 8? No. STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b. If you are married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024, be sure you entered “D” to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6a. Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... 13,500 11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; or $9,000 if single, head of household, qualifying surviving spouse, or married filing separately and you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2024 ..... 12,000 12.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or less, enter -0- ............... 1,500 13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 ................. 12,000 14.Multiply line 13 by 50% (0.50) ...... 6,000 15.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 5,000 16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 is zero, enter -0- ............. 1,275 17.Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 6,275 18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 8,500 19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b ... $6,275 More than 50% of Jamie's net benefits are taxable because the income on line 8 of the worksheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. (See Maximum taxable part under How Much Is T axable , earlier.) Jamie and Jessie enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 6a; and $6,275 on Form 1040, line 6b. Deductions Related to Your Benefits Y ou may be entitled to deduct certain amounts related to the benefits you receive. Disability payments. Y ou may have received disability payments from your employer or an in- surance company that you included as income on your tax return in an earlier year. If you re- ceived a lump -sum payment from the SSA or RRB, and you had to repay the employer or in- surance company for the disability payments, you can take an itemized deduction for the part of the payments you included in gross income in the earlier year. If the amount you repay is more than $3,000, you may be able to claim a tax credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in the same way explained under Repayment of benefits received in an earlier year under Re- payments More Than Gross Benefits next. Repayments More Than Gross Benefits In some situations, your Form SSA -1099 or RRB- 1099 will show that the total benefits you repaid (box 4) are more than the gross benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred, your net Page 68 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 66 Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPublication 17 (2024) --- Page 69 --- benefits in box 5 will be a negative figure (a fig- ure in parentheses) and none of your benefits will be taxable. Don’t use a worksheet in this case. If you receive more than one form, a neg- ative figure in box 5 of one form is used to offset a positive figure in box 5 of another form for that same year. If you have any questions about this nega- tive figure, contact your local SSA office or your local RRB field office . Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint return, and your Form SSA -1099 or RRB -1099 has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse's doesn’t, subtract the amount in box 5 of your form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse's form. Y ou do this to get your net benefits when figuring if your combined benefits are taxable. Example. John and Mary file a joint return for 2024. John received Form SSA -1099 show- ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form SSA- 1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500). John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus $500) as the amount of their net benefits when figuring if any of their combined benefits are tax- able. Repayment of benefits received in an ear- lier year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of all of your Forms SSA -1099 and RRB -1099 is a negative figure, you may be able to deduct part of this negative figure that represents benefits you included in gross income in an earlier year if the figure is more than $3,000. If the figure is $3,000 or less, it is a miscellaneous itemized deduction and can no longer be deducted. Deduction exceeds $3,000. If this deduc- tion is more than $3,000, you should figure your tax two ways. 1.Figure your tax for 2024 with the itemized deduction included on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. 2.Figure your tax for 2024 in the following steps. a.Figure the tax without the itemized de- duction included on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. b.For each year after 1983 for which part of the negative figure represents a repayment of benefits, refigure your taxable benefits as if your total bene- fits for the year were reduced by that part of the negative figure. Then refig- ure the tax for that year. c.Subtract the total of the refigured tax amounts in (b) from the total of your actual tax amounts. d.Subtract the result in (c) from the re- sult in (a). Compare the tax figured in methods 1 and 2. Y our tax for 2024 is the smaller of the two amounts. If method 1 results in less tax, take the itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. If method 2 results in less tax, claim a credit for the amount from step 2c above on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 13z. En- ter “I.R.C. 1341” on the entry line. If both meth- ods produce the same tax, deduct the repay- ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16.8. Other Income What’s New New reporting requirements for Form 1099-K. The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 changed the reporting requirements for third- party settlement organizations. Beginning in 2024, there are lower reporting thresholds for Form 1099 -K. See Changes to reporting re- quirements on form 1099 -K, later. Certain relief payments made to individuals affected by the East Palestine train derail- ment are not taxable. If you received relief payments from a government agency, Norfolk Southern Railway, or its subsidiary, insurer, agent, or a related person due to being affected by the February 3, 2023, East Palestine, Ohio, train derailment, these payments may be non- taxable. See Pub. 547 for more information. Qualified wildfire relief payments are not taxable. If you received a qualified wildfire re- lief payment, those payments may be nontaxa- ble. See Pub. 547 for more information. Reminders Temporary allowance of 100% business meal deduction has expired. Section 210 of the T axpayer Certainty and Disaster T ax Relief Act of 2020 provided for the temporary allow- ance of a 100% business meal deduction for food or beverages provided by a restaurant and paid or incurred after December 31, 2020, and before January 1, 2023. Unemployment compensation. If you re- ceived unemployment compensation but did not receive Form 1099 -G, Certain Government Pay- ments, through the mail, you may need to ac- cess your information through your state’s web- site to get your electronic Form 1099-G. Introduction Y ou must include on your return all items of in- come you receive in the form of money, prop- erty, and services unless the tax law states that you don’t include them. Some items, however, are only partly excluded from income. This chapter discusses many kinds of income and explains whether they’re taxable or nontaxable. •Income that’s taxable must be reported on your tax return and is subject to tax. •Income that’s nontaxable may have to be shown on your tax return but isn’t taxable. This chapter begins with discussions of the following income items. •Bartering. •Canceled debts. •Sales parties at which you’re the host or hostess.•Life insurance proceeds. •Partnership income. •S corporation income. •Recoveries (including state income tax re- funds). •Rents from personal property. •Repayments. •Royalties. •Unemployment benefits. •Welfare and other public assistance bene- fits. These discussions are followed by brief discus- sions of other income items. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 502 Medical and Dental Expenses 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals 523 Selling Y our Home 525 T axable and Nontaxable Income 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts 550 Investment Income and Expenses 4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, Repossessions, and Abandonments For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Bartering Bartering is an exchange of property or serv- ices. Y ou must include in your income, at the time received, the fair market value of property or services you receive in bartering. If you ex- change services with another person and you both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the services, that value will be accepted as fair market value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise. Generally, you report this income on Sched- ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi- ness. However, if the barter involves an ex- change of something other than services, such as in Example 3 below, you may have to use an- other form or schedule instead. Example 1. Y ou’re a self -employed attor- ney who performs legal services for a client, a small corporation. The corporation gives you shares of its stock as payment for your services. Y ou must include the fair market value of the shares in your income on Schedule C (Form 1040) in the year you receive them. Example 2. Y ou’re self -employed and a member of a barter club. The club uses “credit units” as a means of exchange. It adds credit units to your account for goods or services you provide to members, which you can use to pur- chase goods or services offered by other mem- bers of the barter club. The club subtracts credit 502 504 523 525 544 547 550 4681 Page 69 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 8 Other Income 67 --- Page 70 --- units from your account when you receive goods or services from other members. Y ou must include in your income the value of the credit units that are added to your account, even though you may not actually receive goods or services from other members until a later tax year. Example 3. Y ou own a small apartment building. In return for 6 months rent -free use of an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art she created. Y ou must report as rental income on Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In- come and Loss, the fair market value of the art- work, and the artist must report as income on Schedule C (Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apartment. Form 1099 -B from barter exchange. If you exchanged property or services through a bar- ter exchange, Form 1099 -B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Exchange T ransactions, or a similar statement from the barter exchange should be sent to you by February 15, 2025. It should show the value of cash, property, serv- ices, credits, or scrip you received from ex- changes during 2024. The IRS will also receive a copy of Form 1099-B. Canceled Debts In most cases, if a debt you owe is canceled or forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you must include the canceled amount in your in- come. Y ou have no income from the canceled debt if it’s intended as a gift to you. A debt in- cludes any indebtedness for which you’re liable or which attaches to property you hold. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the canceled amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8c. If it’s a business debt, report the amount on Schedule C (Form 1040) (or on Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, if the debt is farm debt and you’re a farmer). Form 1099 -C. If a federal government agency, financial institution, or credit union cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or more, you will receive a Form 1099 -C, Cancellation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is shown in box 2. Interest included in canceled debt. If any interest is forgiven and included in the amount of canceled debt in box 2, the amount of inter- est will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not you must include the interest portion of the can- celed debt in your income depends on whether the interest would be deductible when you paid it. See Deductible debt under Exceptions , later. If the interest wouldn’t be deductible (such as interest on a personal loan), include in your income the amount from box 2 of Form 1099 -C. If the interest would be deductible (such as on a business loan), include in your income the net amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box 3). Discounted mortgage loan. If your financial institution offers a discount for the early pay- ment of your mortgage loan, the amount of the discount is canceled debt. Y ou must include the canceled amount in your income.Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi- tion. If you’re personally liable for a mortgage (recourse debt), and you’re relieved of the mort- gage when you dispose of the property, you may realize gain or loss up to the fair market value of the property. Also, to the extent the mortgage discharge exceeds the fair market value of the property, it’s income from discharge of indebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion under Excluded debt , later. Report any income from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusi- ness debt that doesn’t qualify for exclusion as other income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8c. If you aren’t personally liable for a mortgage (nonrecourse debt), and you’re relieved of the mortgage when you dispose of the property (such as through foreclosure), that relief is inclu- ded in the amount you realize. Y ou may have a taxable gain if the amount you realize exceeds your adjusted basis in the property. Report any gain on nonbusiness property as a capital gain. See Pub. 4681 for more information. Stockholder debt. If you’re a stockholder in a corporation and the corporation cancels or for- gives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a con- structive distribution that’s generally dividend in- come to you. For more information, see Pub. 542, Corporations. If you’re a stockholder in a corporation and you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- tion, you generally don’t realize income. This is because the canceled debt is considered as a contribution to the capital of the corporation equal to the amount of debt principal that you canceled. Repayment of canceled debt. If you included a canceled amount in your income and later pay the debt, you may be able to file a claim for re- fund for the year the amount was included in in- come. Y ou can file a claim on Form 1040 -X, Amended U.S. Individual Income T ax Return, if the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still open. The statute of limitations generally doesn’t end until 3 years after the due date of your original return. Exceptions There are several exceptions to the inclusion of canceled debt in income. These are explained next. Student loans. Generally, if you are responsi- ble for making loan payments, and the loan is canceled or repaid by someone else, you must include the amount that was canceled or paid on your behalf in your gross income for tax pur- poses. However, in certain circumstances, you may be able to exclude amounts from gross in- come as a result of the cancellation or repay- ment of certain student loans. These exclusions are for: •Student loan cancellation due to meeting certain work requirements; •Cancellation of certain loans after Decem- ber 31, 2020, and before January 1, 2026 (see Special rule for student loan dis- charges for 2021 through 2025 , later); or •Certain student loan repayment assistance programs.Exclusion for student loan cancellation due to meeting certain work requirements. If your student loan is canceled in part or in whole in 2024 due to meeting certain work require- ments, you may not have to include the can- celed debt in your income. T o qualify for this work- related exclusion, your loan must have been made by a qualified lender to assist you in attending an eligible educational organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). In addition, the cancellation must be pursuant to a provision in the student loan that all or part of the debt will be canceled if you work: •For a certain period of time, •In certain professions, and •For any of a broad class of employers. The cancellation of your loan won’t qualify for tax -free treatment if it was made by an educational organization or tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization and was canceled because of the services you per- formed for either organization. See Exception , later. Educational organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). This is an educa- tional organization that maintains a regular fac- ulty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of students in attendance at the place where it carries on its educational activi- ties. Qualified lenders. These include the fol- lowing. 1.The United States, or an instrumentality or agency thereof. 2.A state or territory of the United States; or the District of Columbia; or any political subdivision thereof. 3.A public benefit corporation that is tax-ex- empt under section 501(c)(3); and that has assumed control of a state, county, or municipal hospital; and whose employees are considered public employees under state law. 4.An educational organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii), if the loan is made: a.As part of an agreement with an entity described in (1), (2), or (3) under which the funds to make the loan were provided to the educational organiza- tion; or b.Under a program of the educational organization that is designed to en- courage its students to serve in occu- pations with unmet needs or in areas with unmet needs where services pro- vided by the students (or former stu- dents) are for or under the direction of a governmental unit or a tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization. Special rule for student loan discharges for 2021 through 2025. The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 modified the treatment of stu- dent loan forgiveness for discharges in 2021 through 2025. Generally, if you are responsible for making loan payments, and the loan is can- celed or repaid by someone else, you must CAUTION!Page 70 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 68 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 71 --- include the amount that was canceled or paid on your behalf in your gross income for tax pur- poses. However, in certain circumstances, you may be able to exclude this amount from gross income if the loan was one of the following. •A loan for postsecondary educational ex- penses. •A private education loan. •A loan from an educational organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). •A loan from an organization exempt from tax under section 501(a) to refinance a stu- dent loan. See Pub. 4681 and Pub. 970 for more informa- tion. Loan for postsecondary educational expen- ses. This is any loan provided expressly for postsecondary education, regardless of whether provided through the educational or- ganization or directly to the borrower, if such loan was made, insured, or guaranteed by one of the following. •The United States, or an instrumentality or agency thereof. •A state or territory of the United States; or the District of Columbia; or any political subdivision thereof. •An eligible educational organization. Eligible educational organization. An eligi- ble educational organization is generally any accredited public, nonprofit, or proprietary (pri- vately owned profit -making) college, university, vocational school, or other postsecondary edu- cational organization. Also, the organization must be eligible to participate in a student aid program administered by the U.S. Department of Education. An eligible educational organization also in- cludes certain educational organizations loca- ted outside the United States that are eligible to participate in a student aid program adminis- tered by the U.S. Department of Education. The educational organization should be able to tell you if it is an eligible edu- cational organization. Private education loan. A private education loan is a loan provided by a private educational lender that: •Is not made, insured, or guaranteed under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965; and •Is issued expressly for postsecondary edu- cational expenses to a borrower, regard- less of whether the loan is provided through the educational organization that the student attends or directly to the bor- rower from the private educational lender. A private education loan does not include an extension of credit under an open end consumer credit plan, a reverse mortgage transaction, a residential mortgage trans- action, or any other loan that is secured by real property or a dwelling. Private educational lender. A private educa- tional lender is one of the following. •A financial institution that solicits, makes, or extends private education loans. TIP•A federal credit union that solicits, makes or extends private education loans. •Any other person engaged in the business of soliciting, making, or extending private education loans. The cancellation of your loan won’t qualify for tax -free treatment if it is can- celed because of services you per- formed for the private educational lender that made the loan or other organization that provi- ded the funds. Loan from an educational organization de- scribed in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). This is any loan made by the organization if the loan is made: •As part of an agreement with an entity de- scribed earlier under which the funds to make the loan were provided to the educa- tional organization; or •Under a program of the educational organi- zation that is designed to encourage its students to serve in occupations with un- met needs or in areas with unmet needs where the services provided by the stu- dents (or former students) are for or under the direction of a governmental unit or tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization. Educational organization described in sec- tion 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). This is an educational organization that maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of students in attendance at the place where it carries on its educational activities. The cancellation of your loan won’t qualify for tax -free treatment if it was made by an educational organization, a tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization, or a private education lender (as defined in section 140(a)(7) of the T ruth in Lending Act) and was canceled because of the services you per- formed for either such organization or private education lender. See Exception , later. Section 501(c)(3) organization. This is any corporation, community chest, fund, or foundation organized and operated exclusively for one or more of the following purposes. •Charitable. •Religious. •Educational. •Scientific. •Literary. •T esting for public safety. •Fostering national or international amateur sports competition (but only if none of its activities involve providing athletic facilities or equipment). •The prevention of cruelty to children or ani- mals. Exception. In most cases, the cancellation of a student loan made by an educational or- ganization because of services you performed for that organization or another organization that provided the funds for the loan must be inclu- ded in gross income on your tax return. CAUTION! CAUTION!Refinanced loan. If you refinanced a stu- dent loan with another loan from an eligible ed- ucational organization or a tax -exempt organi- zation, that loan may also be considered as made by a qualified lender. The refinanced loan is considered made by a qualified lender if it’s made under a program of the refinancing organ- ization that is designed to encourage students to serve in occupations with unmet needs or in areas with unmet needs where the services re- quired of the students are for or under the direc- tion of a governmental unit or a tax -exempt sec- tion 501(c)(3) organization. Student loan repayment assistance. Stu- dent loan repayments made to you are tax free if you received them for any of the following. •The National Health Service Corps (NHSC) Loan Repayment Program. •A state education loan repayment program eligible for funds under the Public Health Service Act. •Any other state loan repayment or loan for- giveness program that is intended to pro- vide for the increased availability of health services in underserved or health profes- sional shortage areas (as determined by such a state). Y ou can’t deduct the interest you paid on a student loan to the extent pay- ments were made through your partici- pation in any of the above programs. Deductible debt. Y ou don’t have income from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of the debt would be deductible. This exception ap- plies only if you use the cash method of ac- counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of Pub. 334, T ax Guide for Small Business. Price reduced after purchase. In most ca- ses, if the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe for property you purchased, you don’t have income from the reduction. The reduction of the debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment and reduces your basis in the property. Excluded debt. Don’t include a canceled debt in your gross income in the following situations. •The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub. 908, Bankruptcy T ax Guide. •The debt is canceled when you’re insol- vent. However, you can’t exclude any amount of canceled debt that’s more than the amount by which you’re insolvent. See Pub. 908. •The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 of Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide. •The debt is qualified real property business debt. See chapter 5 of Pub. 334. •The cancellation is intended as a gift. •The debt is qualified principal residence in- debtedness. Forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Pro- gram (PPP) loans. The forgiveness of a PPP loan creates tax -exempt income, so although you don't need to report the income from the forgiveness of your PPP loan on Form 1040 or CAUTION!Page 71 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 8 Other Income 69 --- Page 72 --- 1040- SR, you do need to report certain informa- tion related to your PPP loan. Rev. Proc. 2021-48, 2021-49 I.R.B. 835, per- mits taxpayers to treat tax -exempt income re- sulting from the forgiveness of a PPP loan as re- ceived or accrued (1) as, and to the extent that, eligible expenses are paid or incurred; (2) when you apply for forgiveness of the PPP loan; or (3) when forgiveness of the PPP loan is granted. If you have tax -exempt income resulting from the forgiveness of a PPP loan, attach a statement to your return reporting each tax year for which you are applying Rev. Proc. 2021 -48, and which section of Rev. Proc. 2021 -48 you are applying– either section 3.01(1), (2), or (3). Any statement should include the following information for each PPP loan. 1.Y our name, address, and ITIN or SSN; 2.A statement that you are applying or ap- plied section 3.01(1), (2), or (3) of Rev. Proc. 2021-48, and for what tax year; 3.The amount of tax-exempt income from forgiveness of the PPP loan that you are treating as received or accrued and for what tax year; and 4.Whether forgiveness of the PPP loan has been granted as of the date you file your return. Write “RP 2021 -48” at the top of your at- tached statement. Host If you host a party or event at which sales are made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving the event is a payment for helping a direct seller make sales. Y ou must report this item as in- come at its fair market value. Y our out -of-pocket party expenses are sub- ject to the 50% limit for meal expenses. For tax years 2018 and after, no deduction is allowed for any expenses related to activities generally considered entertainment, amusement, or rec- reation. T axpayers may continue to deduct 50% of the cost of business meals if the taxpayer (or an employee of the taxpayer) is present and the food or beverages are not considered lavish or extravagant. The meals may be provided to a current or potential business customer, client, consultant, or similar business contact. Food and beverages that are provided during enter- tainment events will not be considered enter- tainment if purchased separately from the event. For more information about the limit for meal expenses, see Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses. Life Insurance Proceeds Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of the death of the insured person aren’t taxable unless the policy was turned over to you for a price. This is true even if the proceeds were paid under an accident or health insurance pol- icy or an endowment contract. However, inter- est income received as a result of life insurance proceeds may be taxable.Proceeds not received in installments. If death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or other than at regular intervals, include in your in- come only the benefits that are more than the amount payable to you at the time of the insured person's death. If the benefit payable at death isn’t specified, you include in your income the benefit payments that are more than the present value of the payments at the time of death. Proceeds received in installments. If you receive life insurance proceeds in installments, you can exclude part of each installment from your income. T o determine the excluded part, divide the amount held by the insurance company (gener- ally, the total lump sum payable at the death of the insured person) by the number of install- ments to be paid. Include anything over this ex- cluded part in your income as interest. Surviving spouse. If your spouse died be- fore October 23, 1986, and insurance proceeds paid to you because of the death of your spouse are received in installments, you can exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest included in the installments. If you remarry, you can continue to take the exclusion. Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren- der a life insurance policy for cash, you must in- clude in income any proceeds that are more than the cost of the life insurance policy. In most cases, your cost (or investment in the contract) is the total of premiums that you paid for the life insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that weren’t included in your income. Y ou should receive a Form 1099 -R showing the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report these amounts on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. More information. For more information, see Life Insurance Proceeds in Pub. 525. Endowment Contract Proceeds An endowment contract is a policy under which you’re paid a specified amount of money on a certain date unless you die before that date, in which case the money is paid to your designa- ted beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if the proceeds are more than the cost of the pol- icy. T o determine your cost, subtract any amount that you previously received under the contract and excluded from your income from the total premiums (or other consideration) paid for the contract. Include in your income the part of the lump -sum payment that’s more than your cost. Accelerated Death Benefits Certain amounts paid as accelerated death benefits under a life insurance contract or viati- cal settlement before the insured's death are ex- cluded from income if the insured is terminally or chronically ill.Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign- ment of any part of the death benefit under a life insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro- vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person who regularly engages in the business of buy- ing or taking assignment of life insurance con- tracts on the lives of insured individuals who are terminally or chronically ill and who meets the requirements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the In- ternal Revenue Code. Exclusion for terminal illness. Accelerated death benefits are fully excludable if the insured is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who has been certified by a physician as having an illness or physical condition that can reasonably be expected to result in death within 24 months from the date of the certification. Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured is a chronically ill individual who’s not terminally ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis of costs incurred for qualified long -term care serv- ices are fully excludable. Accelerated death benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic ba- sis are excludable up to a limit. For 2024, this limit is $410. It applies to the total of the accel- erated death benefits and any periodic pay- ments received from long -term care insurance contracts. For information on the limit and the definitions of chronically ill individual, qualified long- term care services, and long -term care in- surance contracts, see Long- T erm Care Insur- ance Contracts under Sickness and Injury Ben- efits in Pub. 525. Exception. The exclusion doesn’t apply to any amount paid to a person (other than the in- sured) who has an insurable interest in the life of the insured because the insured: •Is a director, officer, or employee of the person; or •Has a financial interest in the person's business. Form 8853. T o claim an exclusion for acceler- ated death benefits made on a per diem or other periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer MSAs and Long -T erm Care Insurance Contracts, with your return. Y ou don’t have to file Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death benefits paid on the basis of actual expenses incurred. Public Safety Officer Killed or Injured in the Line of Duty A spouse, former spouse, and child of a public safety officer killed in the line of duty can ex- clude from gross income survivor benefits re- ceived from a governmental section 401(a) plan attributable to the officer’s service. See section 101(h). A public safety officer who’s permanently and totally disabled or killed in the line of duty and a surviving spouse or child can exclude from income death or disability benefits re- ceived from the federal Bureau of Justice Assis- tance or death benefits paid by a state program. See section 104(a)(6). For this purpose, the term “public safety offi- cer” includes law enforcement officers, firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and Page 72 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 70 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 73 --- ambulance crew members. For more informa- tion, see Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administrators. Partnership Income A partnership generally isn’t a taxable entity. The income, gains, losses, deductions, and credits of a partnership are passed through to the partners based on each partner's distribu- tive share of these items. Schedule K -1 (Form 1065). Although a part- nership generally pays no tax, it must file an in- formation return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income, and send Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the partnership will send each partner a copy of the Partner's Instructions for Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) to help each partner report his or her share of the partnership's income, deductions, credits, and tax preference items. Keep Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) for your records. Don’t attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, unless you’re specifically required to do so. For more information on partnerships, see Pub. 541, Partnerships. Qualified joint venture. If you and your spouse each materially participate as the only members of a jointly owned and operated busi- ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to be treated as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. T o make this election, you must divide all items of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at- tributable to the business between you and your spouse in accordance with your respective in- terests in the venture. For further information on how to make the election and which sched- ule(s) to file, see the instructions for your indi- vidual tax return. S Corporation Income In most cases, an S corporation doesn’t pay tax on its income. Instead, the income, losses, de- ductions, and credits of the corporation are passed through to the shareholders based on each shareholder's pro rata share. Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S). An S corpora- tion must file a return on Form 1120 -S, U.S. In- come T ax Return for an S Corporation, and send Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S) to each shareholder. In addition, the S corporation will send each shareholder a copy of the Share- holder's Instructions for Schedule K -1 (Form 1120- S) to help each shareholder report her or his share of the S corporation's income, losses, credits, and deductions. Keep Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S) for your records. Don’t attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, unless you’re specifically required to do so. For more information on S corporations and their shareholders, see the Instructions for Form 1120-S. RECORDS RECORDSRecoveries A recovery is a return of an amount you deduc- ted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The most common recoveries are refunds, reim- bursements, and rebates of deductions item- ized on Schedule A (Form 1040). Y ou may also have recoveries of nonitemized deductions (such as payments on previously deducted bad debts) and recoveries of items for which you previously claimed a tax credit. Tax benefit rule. Y ou must include a recovery in your income in the year you receive it up to the amount by which the deduction or credit you took for the recovered amount reduced your tax in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in- crease to an amount carried over to the current year that resulted from the deduction or credit is considered to have reduced your tax in the ear- lier year. For more information, see Pub. 525. Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed- eral income taxes aren’t included in your in- come because they’re never allowed as a de- duction from income. State tax refund. If you received a state or lo- cal income tax refund (or credit or offset) in 2024, you must generally include it in income if you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The payer should send Form 1099 -G to you by Jan- uary 31, 2025. The IRS will also receive a copy of the Form 1099 -G. If you file Form 1040 or 1040- SR, use the State and Local Income T ax Refund Worksheet in the 2024 instructions for Schedule 1 (Form 1040) to figure the amount (if any) to include in your income. See Pub. 525 for when you must use another worksheet. If you could choose to deduct for a tax year either: •State and local income taxes, or •State and local general sales taxes, then the maximum refund that you may have to in- clude in income is limited to the excess of the tax you chose to deduct for that year over the tax you didn’t choose to deduct for that year. For examples, see Pub. 525. Mortgage interest refund. If you received a refund or credit in 2024 of mortgage interest paid in an earlier year, the amount should be shown in Form 1098, box 4, Mortgage Interest Statement. Don’t subtract the refund amount from the interest you paid in 2024. Y ou may have to include it in your income under the rules explained in the following discussions. Interest on recovery. Interest on any of the amounts you recover must be reported as inter- est income in the year received. For example, report any interest you received on state or local income tax refunds on Form 1040, 1040 -SR, or 1040-NR, line 2b. Recovery and expense in same year. If the refund or other recovery and the expense occur in the same year, the recovery reduces the de- duction or credit and isn’t reported as income. Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receive a refund or other recovery that’s for amounts you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered amount between the years in which you paid it. This allocation is necessary to determine the amount of recovery from any earlier years and to determine the amount, if any, of your allowa- ble deduction for this item for the current year. For information on how to figure the allocation, see Recoveries in Pub. 525. Itemized Deduction Recoveries If you recover any amount that you deducted in an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you must generally include the full amount of the re- covery in your income in the year you receive it. Where to report. Enter your state or local in- come tax refund on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, and the total of all other recoveries as other income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. Standard deduction limit. Y ou are generally allowed to claim the standard deduction if you don’t itemize your deductions. Only your item- ized deductions that are more than your stand- ard deduction are subject to the recovery rule (unless you’re required to itemize your deduc- tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year return weren’t more than your income for that year, include in your income this year the lesser of: •Y our recoveries, or •The amount by which your itemized deduc- tions exceeded the standard deduction. Example. For 2023, you filed a joint return. Y our taxable income was $60,000 and you weren’t entitled to any tax credits. Y our standard deduction was $27,700, and you had itemized deductions of $29,200. In 2024, you received the following recoveries for amounts deducted on your 2023 return. Medical expenses ............... $200 State and local income tax refund ....... 400 Refund of mortgage interest .......... 325 T otal recoveries ................ $925 None of the recoveries were more than the de- ductions taken for 2023. The difference be- tween the state and local income tax you de- ducted and your local general sales tax was more than $400. Y our total recoveries are less than the amount by which your itemized deductions ex- ceeded the standard deduction ($29,200 − $27,700 = $1,500), so you must include your to- tal recoveries in your income for 2024. Report the state and local income tax refund of $400 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, and the bal- ance of your recoveries, $525, on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. Standard deduction for earlier years. T o determine if amounts recovered in the current year must be included in your income, you must know the standard deduction for your filing sta- tus for the year the deduction was claimed. Look in the instructions for your tax return from prior years to locate the standard deduction for the filing status for that prior year. If you filed Form 1040 -NR, you couldn’t claim the standard Page 73 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 8 Other Income 71 --- Page 74 --- deduction except for certain nonresident aliens from India (see Pub. 519). Example. Y ou filed a joint return on Form 1040 for 2023 with taxable income of $45,000. Y our itemized deductions were $27,950. The standard deduction that you could have claimed was $27,700. In 2024, you recovered $2,100 of your 2023 itemized deductions. None of the re- coveries were more than the actual deductions for 2023. Include $250 of the recoveries in your 2024 income. This is the smaller of your recov- eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized deductions were more than the stand- ard deduction ($27,950 − $27,700 = $250). Recovery limited to deduction. Y ou don’t in- clude in your income any amount of your recov- ery that’s more than the amount you deducted in the earlier year. The amount you include in your income is limited to the smaller of: •The amount deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), or •The amount recovered. Example. During 2023, you paid $1,700 for medical expenses. Of this amount, you deduc- ted $200 on your 2023 Schedule A (Form 1040). In 2024, you received a $500 reimburse- ment from your medical insurance for your 2023 expenses. The only amount of the $500 reim- bursement that must be included in your income for 2024 is $200 —the amount actually deduc- ted. Other recoveries. See Recoveries in Pub. 525 if: •Y ou have recoveries of items other than itemized deductions, or •Y ou received a recovery for an item for which you claimed a tax credit (other than investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a prior year. Rents From Personal Property If you rent out personal property, such as equip- ment or vehicles, how you report your income and expenses is in most cases determined by: •Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- ness, and •Whether or not the rental activity is con- ducted for profit. In most cases, if your primary purpose is in- come or profit and you’re involved in the rental activity with continuity and regularity, your rental activity is a business. Reporting business income and expenses. If you’re in the business of renting personal property, report your income and expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040). The form instructions have information on how to complete them. Reporting nonbusiness income. If you aren’t in the business of renting personal prop- erty, report your rental income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8l. Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you rent personal property for profit, include your rental expenses in the total amount you enter on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24b, and see the instructions there. If you don’t rent personal property for profit, your deductions are limited and you can’t report a loss to offset other income. See Activity not for profit under Other Income , later. Repayments If you had to repay an amount that you included in your income in an earlier year, you may be able to deduct the amount repaid from your in- come for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able to take a credit against your tax for the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay- ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in your trade or business or in a for -profit transac- tion. Type of deduction. The type of deduction you’re allowed in the year of repayment de- pends on the type of income you included in the earlier year. Y ou generally deduct the repay- ment on the same form or schedule on which you previously reported it as income. For exam- ple, if you reported it as self -employment in- come, deduct it as a business expense on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, de- duct it as a capital loss as explained in the In- structions for Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as wages, unemployment compen- sation, or other nonbusiness income, you may be able to deduct it as an other itemized deduc- tion if the amount repaid is over $3,000. Beginning in 2018, you can no longer claim any miscellaneous itemized de- ductions, so if the amount repaid was $3,000 or less, you are not able to deduct it from your income in the year you repaid it. Repaid social security benefits. If you repaid social security benefits or equivalent railroad re- tirement benefits, see Repayment of benefits. in chapter 7. Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct the repayment as an other itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if you in- cluded the income under a claim of right. This means that at the time you included the income, it appeared that you had an unrestricted right to it. However, you can choose to take a credit for the year of repayment. Figure your tax under both methods and compare the results. Use the method (deduction or credit) that results in less tax. When determining whether the amount you repaid was more or less than $3,000, consider the total amount be- ing repaid on the return. Each instance of re- payment isn’t considered separately. Method 1. Figure your tax for 2024 claiming a deduction for the repaid amount. If you deduct it as an other itemized deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. Method 2. Figure your tax for 2024 claiming a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these steps. CAUTION! CAUTION!1.Figure your tax for 2024 without deducting the repaid amount. 2.Refigure your tax from the earlier year without including in income the amount you repaid in 2024. 3.Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown on your return for the earlier year. This is the credit. 4.Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 2024 figured without the deduction (step 1). If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, claim the credit figured in (3) above on Sched- ule 3 (Form 1040), line 13b, by adding the amount of the credit to any other credits on this line, and see the instructions there. An example of this computation can be found in Pub. 525. Repaid wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes. If you had to repay an amount that you included in your wages or com- pensation in an earlier year on which social se- curity, Medicare, or tier 1 RRTA taxes were paid, ask your employer to refund the excess amount to you. If the employer refuses to refund the taxes, ask for a statement indicating the amount of the overcollection to support your claim. File a claim for refund using Form 843, Claim for Re- fund and Request for Abatement. Repaid wages subject to Additional Medi- care Tax. Employers can’t make an adjust- ment or file a claim for refund for Additional Medicare T ax withholding when there is a re- payment of wages received by an employee in a prior year because the employee determines li- ability for Additional Medicare T ax on the em- ployee's income tax return for the prior year. If you had to repay an amount that you included in your wages or compensation in an earlier year, and on which Additional Medicare T ax was paid, you may be able to recover the Additional Medicare T ax paid on the amount. T o recover Additional Medicare T ax on the repaid wages or compensation, you must file Form 1040 -X for the prior year in which the wages or compensa- tion was originally received. See the Instruc- tions for Form 1040-X. Royalties Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary income. In most cases, you report royalties in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you hold an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in business as a self -employed writer, inven- tor, artist, etc., report your income and expen- ses on Schedule C (Form 1040). Copyrights and patents. Royalties from copy- rights on literary, musical, or artistic works, and similar property, or from patents on inventions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use your work over a specified period of time. Royalties are generally based on the number of units sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a performance, or machines sold.Page 74 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 72 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 75 --- Name, Image, Likeness (NIL). NIL is a term that describes the means through which stu- dent- athletes are allowed to receive financial compensation. NIL refers to the use of a stu- dent-athlete's name, image, or likeness for com- mercial purposes through marketing and pro- motional endeavors. This can include such things as autograph signings, product endorse- ments, licensing and merchandising agree- ments, participating in advertising campaigns, social media posts, teaching camps or lessons, and more. Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount you receive when natural resources are extrac- ted from your property. The royalties are based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and are paid to you by a person or company that leases the property from you. Depletion. If you’re the owner of an eco- nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas wells, you can recover your investment through the depletion allowance. Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum- stances, you can treat amounts you receive from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather than as royalty income. For information about gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, see chapter 2 of Pub. 544. Sale of property interest. If you sell your complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, the amount you receive is considered payment for the sale of property used in a trade or busi- ness under section 1231, not royalty income. Under certain circumstances, the sale is subject to capital gain or loss treatment as explained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 of Pub. 544. If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, or a net profit interest in a mineral property for the life of the property, you have made a lease or a sublease, and any cash you receive for the assignment of other interests in the property is ordinary income subject to a depletion allow- ance. Part of future production sold. If you own mineral property but sell part of the future pro- duction, in most cases you treat the money you receive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a loan from the buyer. Don’t include it in your in- come or take depletion based on it. When production begins, you include all the proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that amount to arrive at your taxable income from the property. Unemployment Benefits The tax treatment of unemployment benefits you receive depends on the type of program paying the benefits. Unemployment compensation. Y ou must in- clude in income all unemployment compensa- tion you receive. Y ou should receive a Form 1099- G showing in box 1 the total unemploy- ment compensation paid to you. In most cases, you enter unemployment compensation on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 7. If you received unemployment com- pensation but did not receive Form 1099- G through the mail, you may need to access your information through your state’s website to get your electronic Form 1099-G. Types of unemployment compensation. Unemployment compensation generally in- cludes any amount received under an unem- ployment compensation law of the United States or of a state. It includes the following benefits. •Benefits paid by a state or the District of Columbia from the Federal Unemployment T rust Fund. •State unemployment insurance benefits. •Railroad unemployment compensation benefits. •Disability payments from a government program paid as a substitute for unemploy- ment compensation. (Amounts received as workers' compensation for injuries or ill- ness aren’t unemployment compensation. See chapter 5 for more information.) •T rade readjustment allowances under the T rade Act of 1974. •Unemployment assistance under the Dis- aster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. •Unemployment assistance under the Air- line Deregulation Act of 1978 Program. Governmental program. If you contribute to a governmental unemployment compensa- tion program and your contributions aren’t de- ductible, amounts you receive under the pro- gram aren’t included as unemployment compensation until you recover your contribu- tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to the program, the entire amount you receive un- der the program is included in your income. Repayment of unemployment compensa- tion. If you repaid in 2024 unemployment com- pensation you received in 2024, subtract the amount you repaid from the total amount you re- ceived and enter the difference on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 7. On the dotted line next to your entry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you repaid. If you repaid unemployment compensa- tion in 2024 that you included in income in an earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if you item- ize deductions and the amount is more than $3,000. See Repayments , earlier. Tax withholding. Y ou can choose to have federal income tax withheld from your unem- ployment compensation. T o make this choice, complete Form W -4V , Voluntary Withholding Request, and give it to the paying office. T ax will be withheld at 10% of your payment. CAUTION!If you don’t choose to have tax withheld from your unemployment compensa- tion, you may be liable for estimated tax. If you don’t pay enough tax, either through withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. For more information on estimated tax, see chap- ter 4 . Supplemental unemployment benefits. Benefits received from an employer -financed fund (to which the employees didn’t contribute) aren’t unemployment compensation. They are taxable as wages. For more information, see Supplemental Unemployment Compensation Benefits in section 5 of Pub. 15 -A, Employer's Supplemental T ax Guide. Report these pay- ments on line 1a of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Repayment of benefits. Y ou may have to repay some of your supplemental unemploy- ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment allowances under the T rade Act of 1974. If you repay supplemental unemployment benefits in the same year you receive them, reduce the to- tal benefits by the amount you repay. If you re- pay the benefits in a later year, you must include the full amount of the benefits received in your income for the year you received them. Deduct the repayment in the later year as an adjustment to gross income on Form 1040 or 1040- SR. Include the repayment on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24e, and see the instructions there. If the amount you repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you may be able to take a credit against your tax for the later year instead of deducting the amount repaid. For more infor- mation on this, see Repayments , earlier. Private unemployment fund. Unemployment benefit payments from a private (nonunion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are taxable only if the amounts you receive are more than your total payments into the fund. Report the taxable amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you as an unemployed member of a union from regular union dues are included in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. However, if you contribute to a special union fund and your payments to the fund aren’t deductible, the un- employment benefits you receive from the fund are includible in your income only to the extent they’re more than your contributions. Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re- ceive from your employer during periods of un- employment, under a union agreement that guarantees you full pay during the year, are tax- able as wages. Include them on line 1a of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. State employees. Payments similar to a state's unemployment compensation may be made by the state to its employees who aren’t covered by the state's unemployment compen- sation law. Although the payments are fully tax- able, don’t report them as unemployment com- pensation. Report these payments on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. CAUTION!Page 75 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 8 Other Income 73 --- Page 76 --- Welfare and Other Public Assistance Benefits Don’t include in your income governmental ben- efit payments from a public welfare fund based upon need, such as payments to blind individu- als under a state public assistance law. Pay- ments from a state fund for the victims of crime shouldn’t be included in the victims' incomes if they’re in the nature of welfare payments. Don’t deduct medical expenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Y ou must include in your income any welfare payments that are compensation for services or that are obtained fraudulently. Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assis- tance (RTAA) payments. RTAA payments re- ceived from a state must be included in your in- come. The state must send you Form 1099 -G to advise you of the amount you should include in income. The amount should be reported on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. Persons with disabilities. If you have a disa- bility, you must include in income compensation you receive for services you perform unless the compensation is otherwise excluded. However, you don’t include in income the value of goods, services, and cash that you receive, not in re- turn for your services, but for your training and rehabilitation because you have a disability. Ex- cludable amounts include payments for trans- portation and attendant care, such as inter- preter services for the deaf, reader services for the blind, and services to help individuals with an intellectual disability do their work. Disaster relief grants. Don’t include post -dis- aster grants received under the Robert T . Staf- ford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in your income if the grant payments are made to help you meet necessary expenses or serious needs for medical, dental, housing, per- sonal property, transportation, childcare, or fu- neral expenses. Don’t deduct casualty losses or medical expenses that are specifically reim- bursed by these disaster relief grants. If you have deducted a casualty loss for the loss of your personal residence and you later receive a disaster relief grant for the loss of the same resi- dence, you may have to include part or all of the grant in your taxable income. See Recoveries , earlier. Unemployment assistance payments under the Act are taxable unemployment com- pensation. See Unemployment compensation under Unemployment Benefits , earlier. Disaster relief payments. Y ou can exclude from income any amount you receive that’s a qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis- aster relief payment is an amount paid to you: 1.T o reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- essary personal, family, living, or funeral expenses that result from a qualified dis- aster; 2.T o reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- essary expenses incurred for the repair or rehabilitation of your home or repair or re- placement of its contents to the extent it’s due to a qualified disaster;3.By a person engaged in the furnishing or sale of transportation as a common carrier because of the death or personal physical injuries incurred as a result of a qualified disaster; or 4.By a federal, state, or local government; agency; or instrumentality in connection with a qualified disaster in order to pro- mote the general welfare. Y ou can exclude this amount only to the extent any expense it pays for isn’t paid for by insur- ance or otherwise. The exclusion doesn’t apply if you were a participant or conspirator in a ter- rorist action or a representative of one. A qualified disaster is: •A disaster which results from a terrorist or military action; •A federally declared disaster; or •A disaster which results from an accident involving a common carrier, or from any other event, which is determined to be catastrophic by the Secretary of the T reas- ury or his or her delegate. For amounts paid under item (4) above, a disaster is qualified if it’s determined by an ap- plicable federal, state, or local authority to war- rant assistance from the federal, state, or local government, agency, or instrumentality. Disaster mitigation payments. Y ou can ex- clude from income any amount you receive that’s a qualified disaster mitigation payment. Qualified disaster mitigation payments are most commonly paid to you in the period immediately following damage to property as a result of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation payments are used to mitigate (reduce the se- verity of) potential damage from future natural disasters. They’re paid to you through state and local governments based on the provisions of the Robert T . Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer- gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In- surance Act. Y ou can’t increase the basis or adjusted ba- sis of your property for improvements made with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP). If you benefit from Pay -for-Perform- ance Success Payments under HAMP , the pay- ments aren’t taxable. Mortgage assistance payments under sec- tion 235 of the National Housing Act. Pay- ments made under section 235 of the National Housing Act for mortgage assistance aren’t in- cluded in the homeowner's income. Interest paid for the homeowner under the mortgage as- sistance program can’t be deducted. Medicare. Medicare benefits received under ti- tle XVIII of the Social Security Act aren’t includi- ble in the gross income of the individuals for whom they’re paid. This includes basic (Part A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged)) and supplementary (Part B (Supplementary Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)). Social security benefits (including lump- sum payments attributable to prior years), Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits, and lump -sum death benefits. The Social Security Administration (SSA) provides benefits such as old -age benefits, benefits to disabled workers, and benefits to spouses and dependents. These benefits may be subject to federal income tax depending on your filing sta- tus and other income. See chapter 7 in this pub- lication and Pub. 915, Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits, for more information. An individual originally denied benefits, but later approved, may receive a lump- sum payment for the period when benefits were denied (which may be prior years). See Pub. 915 for information on how to make a lump- sum election, which may reduce your tax liability. There are also other types of benefits paid by the SSA. However, SSI benefits and lump- sum death benefits (one -time payment to spouse and children of deceased) aren’t sub- ject to federal income tax. For more information on these benefits, go to SSA.gov . Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food ben- efits you receive under the Nutrition Program for the Elderly aren’t taxable. If you prepare and serve free meals for the program, include in your income as wages the cash pay you re- ceive, even if you’re also eligible for food bene- fits. Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. Payments made by a state to qualified people to reduce their cost of winter energy use aren’t taxable. Other Income The following brief discussions are arranged in alphabetical order. Other income items briefly discussed below are referenced to publications which provide more topical information. Activity not for profit. Y ou must include on your return income from an activity from which you don’t expect to make a profit. An example of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you op- erate mostly for recreation and pleasure. Enter this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8j. Deductions for expenses related to the activity are limited. They can’t total more than the in- come you report and can be taken only if you itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re- ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report it as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8g. The state of Alaska sends each recipi- ent a document that shows the amount of the payment with the check. The amount is also re- ported to the IRS. Alimony. Include in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a, any taxable alimony pay- ments you receive. Amounts you receive for child support aren’t income to you. Alimony and child support payments are discussed in Pub. 504. Don’t include alimony payments you re- ceive under a divorce or separation agreement (1) executed after 2018, or (2) executed before 2019 but later modified if the modification expressly states the repeal of the deduction for alimony payments applies to the modification. CAUTION!Page 76 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 74 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 77 --- Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your income. Campaign contributions. These contributions aren’t income to a candidate unless they’re di- verted to her or his personal use. T o be nontax- able, the contributions must be spent for cam- paign purposes or kept in a fund for use in future campaigns. However, interest earned on bank deposits, dividends received on contrib- uted securities, and net gains realized on sales of contributed securities are taxable and must be reported on Form 1120 -POL, U.S. Income T ax Return for Certain Political Organizations. Excess campaign funds transferred to an office account must be included in the officeholder's income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, in the year transferred. Carpools. Don’t include in your income amounts you receive from the passengers for driving a car in a carpool to and from work. These amounts are considered reimbursement for your expenses. However, this rule doesn’t apply if you have developed carpool arrange- ments into a profit -making business of trans- porting workers for hire. Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isn’t income, but you must reduce your basis by the amount of the rebate. Example. Y ou buy a new car for $24,000 cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check from the manufacturer. The $2,000 isn’t income to you. Y our basis in the car is $22,000. This is the basis on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the car and depreciation if you use it for busi- ness. Casualty insurance and other reimburse- ments. Y ou generally shouldn’t report these re- imbursements on your return unless you’re fig- uring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. See Pub. 547 for more information. Child support payments. Y ou shouldn’t re- port these payments on your return. See Pub. 504 for more information. Court awards and damages. T o determine if settlement amounts you receive by compromise or judgment must be included in your income, you must consider the item that the settlement replaces. The character of the income as ordi- nary income or capital gain depends on the na- ture of the underlying claim. Include the follow- ing as ordinary income. 1.Interest on any award. 2.Compensation for lost wages or lost profits in most cases. 3.Punitive damages, in most cases. It doesn’t matter if they relate to a physical injury or physical sickness. 4.Amounts received in settlement of pension rights (if you didn’t contribute to the plan). 5.Damages for: a.Patent or copyright infringement, b.Breach of contract, or c.Interference with business operations.6.Back pay and damages for emotional dis- tress received to satisfy a claim under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 7.Attorney fees and costs (including contin- gent fees) where the underlying recovery is included in gross income. 8.Attorney fees and costs relating to whistle- blower awards where the underlying re- covery is included in gross income. Don’t include in your income compensatory damages for personal physical injury or physical sickness (whether received in a lump sum or in- stallments). Emotional distress. Emotional distress it- self isn’t a physical injury or physical sickness, but damages you receive for emotional distress due to a physical injury or sickness are treated as received for the physical injury or sickness. Don’t include them in your income. If the emotional distress is due to a personal injury that isn’t due to a physical injury or sick- ness (for example, employment discrimination or injury to reputation), you must include the damages in your income, except for any dam- ages that aren’t more than amounts paid for medical care due to that emotional distress. Emotional distress includes physical symptoms that result from emotional distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and stomach disorders. Credit card insurance. In most cases, if you receive benefits under a credit card disability or unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are taxable to you. These plans make the minimum monthly payment on your credit card account if you can’t make the payment due to injury, ill- ness, disability, or unemployment. Report on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, the amount of benefits you received during the year that’s more than the amount of the premiums you paid during the year. Down payment assistance. If you purchase a home and receive assistance from a nonprofit corporation to make the down payment, that as- sistance isn’t included in your income. If the cor- poration qualifies as a tax -exempt charitable or- ganization, the assistance is treated as a gift and is included in your basis of the house. If the corporation doesn’t qualify, the assistance is treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase price and isn’t included in your basis. Employment agency fees. If you get a job through an employment agency, and the fee is paid by your employer, the fee isn’t includible in your income if you aren’t liable for it. However, if you pay it and your employer reimburses you for it, it’s includible in your income. Energy conservation subsidies. Y ou can ex- clude from gross income any subsidy provided, either directly or indirectly, by public utilities for the purchase or installation of an energy con- servation measure for a dwelling unit. Energy conservation measure. This in- cludes installations or modifications that are pri- marily designed to reduce consumption of elec- tricity or natural gas, or improve the management of energy demand. Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or similar property. If a building or structure con- tains both dwelling and other units, any subsidy must be properly allocated. Estate and trust income. An estate or trust, unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal in- come tax. If you’re a beneficiary of an estate or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its in- come distributed or required to be distributed to you. However, there is never a double tax. Es- tates and trusts file their returns on Form 1041, U.S. Income T ax Return for Estates and T rusts, and your share of the income is reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041). Current income required to be distrib- uted. If you’re the beneficiary of an estate or trust that must distribute all of its current in- come, you must report your share of the distrib- utable net income, whether or not you actually received it. Current income not required to be dis- tributed. If you’re the beneficiary of an estate or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whether to distribute all or part of the current in- come, you must report: •All income that’s required to be distributed to you, whether or not it’s actually distrib- uted, plus •All other amounts actually paid or credited to you, up to the amount of your share of distributable net income. How to report. T reat each item of income the same way that the estate or trust would treat it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is distributed to you, you report the distribution as dividend income on your return. The same rule applies to distributions of tax -exempt interest and capital gains. The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell you the type of items making up your share of the estate or trust income and any credits you’re allowed on your individual income tax return. Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener- ally aren’t deductible by the beneficiaries. Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi- ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over the trust. (The grantor is the one who transfer- red property to the trust.) This rule applies if the property (or income from the property) put into the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the grantor or the grantor's spouse. Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the value of the transferred property. Expenses paid by another. If your personal expenses are paid for by another person, such as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to you depending upon your relationship with that person and the nature of the payment. But if the payment makes up for a loss caused by that person, and only restores you to the posi- tion you were in before the loss, the payment isn’t includible in your income. Fees for services. Include all fees for your services in your income. Examples of these Page 77 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 8 Other Income 75 --- Page 78 --- fees are amounts you receive for services you perform as: •A corporate director; •An executor, administrator, or personal representative of an estate; •A manager of a trade or business you op- erated before declaring chapter 11 bank- ruptcy; •A notary public; or •An election precinct official. Nonemployee compensation. If you aren’t an employee and the fees for your services from a single payer in the course of the payer's trade or business total $600 or more for the year, the payer should send you a Form 1099 -NEC. Y ou may need to report your fees as self -employ- ment income. See Self-Employed Persons in chapter 1 for a discussion of when you’re con- sidered self-employed. Corporate director. Corporate director fees are self -employment income. Report these pay- ments on Schedule C (Form 1040). Personal representatives. All personal representatives must include in their gross in- come fees paid to them from an estate. If you aren’t in the trade or business of being an exec- utor (for instance, you’re the executor of a friend's or relative's estate), report these fees on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. If you’re in the trade or business of being an executor, report these fees as self -employment income on Schedule C (Form 1040). The fee isn’t includi- ble in income if it’s waived. Manager of trade or business for bank- ruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay- ments received from your bankruptcy estate for managing or operating a trade or business that you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. Report this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. Notary public. Report payments for these services on Schedule C (Form 1040). These payments aren’t subject to self -employment tax. See the separate Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details. Election precinct official. Y ou should re- ceive a Form W -2 showing payments for serv- ices performed as an election official or election worker. Report these payments on line 1a of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Foster care providers. Generally, payment you receive from a state, a political subdivision, or a qualified foster care placement agency for caring for a qualified foster individual in your home is excluded from your income. However, you must include in your income payment to the extent it’s received for the care of more than five qualified foster individuals age 19 years or older. A qualified foster individual is a person who: 1.Is living in a foster family home; and 2.Was placed there by: a.An agency of a state or one of its polit- ical subdivisions, or b.A qualified foster care placement agency.Difficulty-of- care payments. These are payments that are designated by the payer as compensation for providing the additional care that’s required for physically, mentally, or emo- tionally handicapped qualified foster individuals. A state must determine that this compensation is needed, and the care for which the payments are made must be provided in the foster care provider's home in which the qualified foster in- dividual was placed. Certain Medicaid waiver payments are trea- ted as difficulty -of-care payments when re- ceived by an individual care provider for caring for an eligible individual living in the provider's home. See Notice 2014 -7, available at IRS.gov/irb/2014-04_IRB#NOT -2014-7 , and re- lated questions and answers, available at IRS.gov/Individuals/Certain-Medicaid-Waiver- Payments-May-Be-Excludable-From-Income , for more information. Y ou must include in your income diffi- culty-of- care payments to the extent they’re re- ceived for more than: •10 qualified foster individuals under age 19, or •5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or older. Maintaining space in home. If you’re paid to maintain space in your home for emergency foster care, you must include the payment in your income. Reporting taxable payments. If you re- ceive payments that you must include in your in- come and you’re in business as a foster care provider, report the payments on Schedule C (Form 1040). See Pub. 587, Business Use of Y our Home, to help you determine the amount you can deduct for the use of your home. Found property. If you find and keep property that doesn’t belong to you that has been lost or abandoned (treasure trove), it’s taxable to you at its fair market value in the first year it’s your undisputed possession. Free tour. If you received a free tour from a travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, you must include its value in your income. Re- port the fair market value of the tour on Sched- ule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, if you aren’t in the trade or business of organizing tours. Y ou can’t deduct your expenses in serving as the volun- tary leader of the group at the group's request. If you organize tours as a trade or business, re- port the tour's value on Schedule C (Form 1040). Gambling winnings. Y ou must include your gambling winnings in income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8b. Winnings from fantasy sports leagues are gambling winnings. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling losses you had during the year, but only up to the amount of your winnings. If you’re in the trade or business of gambling, use Schedule C (Form 1040). Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter- ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- tion to cash winnings, you must include in your income the fair market value of bonds, cars, houses, and other noncash prizes.If you win a state lottery prize payable in installments, see Pub. 525 for more information. Form W -2G. Y ou may have received a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, showing the amount of your gambling winnings and any tax taken out of them. Include the amount from box 1 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8b. In- clude the amount shown in box 4 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 25c, as federal income tax withheld. Reporting winnings and recordkeeping. For more information on reporting gambling winnings and recordkeeping, see Gambling Losses up to the Amount of Gambling Winnings in chapter 12. Gifts and inheritances. In most cases, prop- erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheri- tance isn’t included in your income. However, if property you receive this way later produces in- come such as interest, dividends, or rents, that income is taxable to you. If property is given to a trust and the income from it is paid, credited, or distributed to you, that income is also taxable to you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the in- come from the property, that income is taxable to you. Inherited pension or individual retire- ment arrangement (IRA). If you inherited a pension or an IRA, you may have to include part of the inherited amount in your income. See Survivors and Beneficiaries in Pub. 575 if you inherited a pension. See What if Y ou Inherit an IRA? in Pubs. 590 -A and 590 -B if you inherited an IRA. Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby aren’t de- ductible from other income. A hobby is an activ- ity from which you don’t expect to make a profit. See Activity not for profit , earlier. If you collect stamps, coins, or other items as a hobby for recreation and pleasure, and you sell any of the items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (See Pub. 550.) However, if you sell items from your col- lection at a loss, you can’t deduct the loss. Illegal activities. Income from illegal activities, such as money from dealing illegal drugs, must be included in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, or on Schedule C (Form 1040) if from your self-employment activity. Indian fishing rights. If you’re a member of a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights se- cured by treaty, Executive order, or an Act of Congress as of March 17, 1988, don’t include in your income amounts you receive from activities related to those fishing rights. The income isn’t subject to income tax, self -employment tax, or employment taxes. Interest on frozen deposits. In general, you exclude from your income the amount of inter- est earned on a frozen deposit. See Interest in- come on frozen deposits in chapter 6. Interest on qualified savings bonds. Y ou may be able to exclude from income the interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if you pay qualified higher education expenses in TIP CAUTION!Page 78 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 76 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 79 --- the same year. For more information on this ex- clusion, see Education Savings Bond Program under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 6. Job interview expenses. If a prospective em- ployer asks you to appear for an interview and either pays you an allowance or reimburses you for your transportation and other travel expen- ses, the amount you receive is generally not taxable. Y ou include in income only the amount you receive that’s more than your actual expen- ses. Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be included in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8h. If you gave any of your jury duty pay to your employer because your employer continued to pay you while you served jury duty, include the amount you gave your employer as an income adjustment on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24a, and see the instructions there. Kickbacks. Y ou must include kickbacks, side commissions, push money, or similar payments you receive in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, or on Schedule C (Form 1040) if from your self-employment activity. Example. Y ou sell cars and help arrange car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay back part of their commissions to you for refer- ring customers to them. Y ou must include the kickbacks in your income. Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs and Medicare Advantage MSAs). In most ca- ses, you don’t include in income amounts you withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualified medical expenses are those you can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information about qualified medical expenses, see Pub. 502. For more information about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage MSAs, see Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other T ax -Fa- vored Health Plans. Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz program, beauty contest, or other event, you must include it in your income. For example, if you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, you must report this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8i. If you refuse to accept a prize, don’t include its value in your income. Prizes and awards in goods or services must be included in your income at their fair market value. Employee awards or bonuses. Cash awards or bonuses given to you by your em- ployer for good work or suggestions must gen- erally be included in your income as wages. However, certain noncash employee achieve- ment awards can be excluded from income. See Bonuses and awards in chapter 5. Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you were awarded a prize in recognition of accom- plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar- tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you must generally include the value of the prize in your income. However, you don’t include this prize in your income if you meet all of the follow- ing requirements. •Y ou were selected without any action on your part to enter the contest or proceed- ing. •Y ou aren’t required to perform substantial future services as a condition to receiving the prize or award. •The prize or award is transferred by the payer directly to a governmental unit or tax-exempt charitable organization as des- ignated by you. See Pub. 525 for more information about the conditions that apply to the transfer. Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF). Effective December 22, 2017, Code section 1400Z -2 provides a temporary deferral on inclusion in gross income for capital gains invested in QOFs, and permanent exclusion of capital gains from the sale or exchange of an invest- ment in the QOF if the investment is held for at least 10 years. See the Instructions for Form 8949 on how to report your election to defer eli- gible gains invested in a QOF . See the instruc- tions for Form 8997, Initial and Annual State- ment of Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF) Investments, for reporting information. For addi- tional information, see Opportunity Zones Fre- quently Asked Questions at IRS.gov/ Newsroom/Opportunity-Zones-Frequently- Asked-Questions . Qualified tuition programs (QTPs). A QTP (also known as a 529 program) is a program set up to allow you to either prepay or contribute to an account established for paying a student's qualified higher education expenses at an eligi- ble educational institution. A program can be established and maintained by a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, or an eligi- ble educational institution. The part of a distribution representing the amount paid or contributed to a QTP isn’t inclu- ded in income. This is a return of the investment in the program. In most cases, the beneficiary doesn’t in- clude in income any earnings distributed from a QTP if the total distribution is less than or equal to adjusted qualified higher education expen- ses. See Pub. 970 for more information. Railroad retirement annuities. The following types of payments are treated as pension or an- nuity income and are taxable under the rules explained in Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity In- come. •Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are more than the social security equivalent benefit. •Tier 2 benefits. •Vested dual benefits. Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing information, include it in your income. Sale of home. Y ou may be able to exclude from income all or part of any gain from the sale or exchange of your main home. See Pub. 523. Sale of personal items. If you sold an item you owned for personal use, such as a car, re- frigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or silver- ware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. Re-port it as explained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). Y ou can’t deduct a loss. However, if you sold an item you held for in- vestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain and any loss is deductible as a capital loss. Example. Y ou sold a painting on an online auction website for $100. Y ou bought the paint- ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report your gain as a capital gain as explained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). Scholarships and fellowships. A candidate for a degree can exclude amounts received as a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- ceive that’s for: •T uition and fees to enroll at or attend an educational institution; or •Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re- quired for courses at the educational insti- tution. Amounts used for room and board don’t qualify for the exclusion. See Pub. 970 for more infor- mation on qualified scholarships and fellowship grants. Payment for services. In most cases, you must include in income the part of any scholar- ship or fellowship that represents payment for past, present, or future teaching, research, or other services. This applies even if all candi- dates for a degree must perform the services to receive the degree. For information about the rules that apply to a tax -free qualified tuition reduction provided to employees and their families by an educational institution, see Pub. 970. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pay- ments. Allowances paid by the VA aren’t inclu- ded in your income. These allowances aren’t considered scholarship or fellowship grants. Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest aren’t scholarships or fellowships if you don’t have to use the prizes for educational purposes. Y ou must include these amounts in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8i, whether or not you use the amounts for educational purpo- ses. Sharing/gig economy. A sharing economy is one in which assets are shared between individ- uals for a fee, usually through the internet. For example, you rent out your car when you don’t need it, or you share your wi-fi account for a fee. A gig economy is one in which a short -term contract or freelance work is the norm, as op- posed to a permanent job. For example, you drive for a ride -sharing service, or work as a fit- ness trainer, babysitter, or tutor. Generally, if you have income from sharing economy transactions, or you did gig work, you must include all income received whether you received a Form 1099 -K, Payment Card and Third- Party Network T ransactions, or not. See the Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040) and the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). Changes to reporting requirements on Form 1099 -K. For calendar years after 2023, Page 79 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 8 Other Income 77 --- Page 80 --- lower reporting thresholds will lead to more peo- ple receiving a Form 1099 -K. For calendar year 2024, taxpayers who accept payments from a third- party settlement organization will receive a Form 1099 -K if the aggregate amount they re- ceive for the provision of goods and services exceeds $5,000 during the calendar year. Use amounts reported on the Form 1099 -K with your other tax records to compute your taxable in- come. T axpayers who received payments as gross receipts in a trade or business should re- port their gross receipts on Schedule C (Form 1040). T axpayers who received payments for the sale of a capital asset at a gain should re- port the sale on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040). T axpayers who received pay- ments for the sale of an asset used in a trade or business or held for the production of income, on which depreciation was or should have been claimed, report the sale on Form 4797. T axpay- ers who received payments from the sale of a personal item sold at a gain treat the sale as a sale of a capital asset as discussed above. If the personal item was sold at a loss, the loss is generally not deductible. Report the sales amount as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, and the same amount as a deduction on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24z. If the loss was a result of a casualty in a federally declared disaster, see the instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040), line 15. If the Form 1099-K errone- ously reports reimbursements for personal ex- penses, report the amount on both Schedule 1 (Form 1040), lines 8z and 24z. For more infor- mation about Form 1099 -K, see the Instructions for Payee included on that form and frequently asked questions and other information at IRS.gov/1099K . State tax payments. Do not include pay- ments on your tax return made by states under legislatively provided social benefit programs for the promotion of the general welfare. T o qualify for the general welfare exclusion, state payments must be paid from a governmental fund, be for the promotion of general welfare (that is, based on the need of the individual or family receiving such payments), and not repre- sent compensation for services. Stolen property. If you steal property, you must report its fair market value in your income in the year you steal it unless you return it to its rightful owner in the same year. Transporting school children. Don’t include in your income a school board mileage allow- ance for taking children to and from school if you aren’t in the business of taking children to school. Y ou can’t deduct expenses for providing this transportation. Union benefits and dues. Amounts deducted from your pay for union dues, assessments, contributions, or other payments to a union can’t be excluded from your income. Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, including both cash and the fair market value of other property, are usually included in your in- come as compensation. Y ou can exclude these benefits from your income only when the facts clearly show that the union intended them as gifts to you.Utility rebates. If you’re a customer of an elec- tric utility company and you participate in the utility's energy conservation program, you may receive on your monthly electric bill either: •A reduction in the purchase price of elec- tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or •A nonrefundable credit against the pur- chase price of the electricity. The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefunda- ble credit isn’t included in your income. 9. Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) What’s New IRA contribution limit increased. Beginning in 2024, the IRA contribution limit is increased to $7,000 ($8,000 for individuals age 50 or older) from $6,500 ($7,500 for individuals age 50 or older). Distributions to victims of domestic abuse. Beginning with distributions made after Decem- ber 31, 2023, a distribution to a domestic abuse victim is not subject to the 10% additional tax on early distributions if certain requirements are met. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Distributions for emergency personal ex- penses. Beginning with distributions made af- ter December 31, 2023, a distribution to an indi- vidual for certain emergency personal expenses is not subject to the 10% additional tax on early distributions if certain requirements are met. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Modified adjusted gross income (AGI) limit for traditional IRA contributions. For 2024, if you are covered by a retirement plan at work, your deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is reduced (phased out) if your modified AGI is: •More than $123,000 but less than $143,000 for a married couple filing a joint return or a qualifying surviving spouse, •More than $77,000 but less than $87,000 for a single individual or head of house- hold, or •Less than $10,000 for a married individual filing a separate return. If you either live with your spouse or file a joint return, and your spouse is covered by a retire- ment plan at work but you aren’t, your deduction is phased out if your modified AGI is more than $230,000 but less than $240,000. If your modi- fied AGI is $240,000 or more, you can’t take a deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA. See How Much Can Y ou Deduct , later. Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contribu- tions. For 2024, your Roth IRA contribution limit is reduced (phased out) in the following sit- uations. •Y our filing status is married filing jointly or qualifying surviving spouse and your modi- fied AGI is at least $230,000. Y ou can’t make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi- fied AGI is $240,000 or more. •Y our filing status is single, head of house- hold, or married filing separately and you didn’t live with your spouse at any time in 2024 and your modified AGI is at least $146,000. Y ou can’t make a Roth IRA con- tribution if your modified AGI is $161,000 or more. •Y our filing status is married filing sepa- rately, you lived with your spouse at any time during the year, and your modified AGI is more than zero. Y ou can’t make a Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI is $10,000 or more. See Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth IRA , later. 2025 modified AGI limits. Y ou can find infor- mation about the 2025 contribution and AGI lim- its in Pub. 590-A. Reminders Contributions to both traditional and Roth IRAs. For information on your combined contri- bution limit if you contribute to both traditional and Roth IRAs, see Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs , later. Statement of required minimum distribu- tion. If a minimum distribution from your IRA is required, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that held the IRA at the end of the preceding year must either report the amount of the required minimum distribution to you, or offer to figure it for you. The report or offer must include the date by which the amount must be distributed. The report is due January 31 of the year in which the minimum distribution is required. It can be provided with the year -end fair market value statement that you normally get each year. No report is required for IRAs of owners who have died. IRA interest. Although interest earned from your IRA is generally not taxed in the year earned, it isn't tax -exempt interest. T ax on your traditional IRA is generally deferred until you take a distribution. Don't report this interest on your tax return as tax-exempt interest. Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT). For pur- poses of the NIIT , net investment income doesn't include distributions from a qualified re- tirement plan including IRAs (for example, 401(a), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 408A, or 457(b) plans). However, these distributions are taken into account when determining the modified AGI threshold. Distributions from a nonqualified retirement plan are included in net investment income. See Form 8960, Net Investment Page 80 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 78 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 81 --- Income T ax —Individuals, Estates, and T rusts, and its instructions for more information. Form 8606. T o designate contributions as non- deductible, you must file Form 8606. The term “50 or older” is used several times in this chapter. It refers to an IRA owner who is age 50 or older by the end of the tax year. Introduction An IRA is a personal savings plan that gives you tax advantages for setting aside money for your retirement. This chapter discusses the following topics. •The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA that isn't a Roth or SIMPLE IRA). •The Roth IRA, which features nondeducti- ble contributions and tax-free distributions. Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees (SIMPLE) plans aren't discussed in this chapter. For more information on these plans and em- ployees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part of these plans, see Pub. 560. For information about contributions, deduc- tions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and other transactions, see Pub. 590 -A and Pub. 590-B. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 560 Retirement Plans for Small Business 575 Pension and Annuity Income 590-A Contributions to Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 590-B Distributions from Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Form (and Instructions) 5329 Additional T axes on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and Other T ax-Favored Accounts 8606 Nondeductible IRAs 8915-F Qualified Disaster Retirement Plan Distributions and Repayments For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Traditional IRAs In this chapter, the original IRA (sometimes called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to as a “traditional IRA.” A traditional IRA is any IRA that isn't a Roth IRA or a SIMPLE IRA. T wo advantages of a traditional IRA are: •Y ou may be able to deduct some or all of your contributions to it, depending on your circumstances; and •Generally, amounts in your IRA, including earnings and gains, aren't taxed until they are distributed. TIP 560 575 590-A 590-B 5329 8606 8915-FWho Can Open a Traditional IRA? Y ou can open and make contributions to a tradi- tional IRA if you (or, if you file a joint return, your spouse) received taxable compensation during the year. For tax years beginning after 2019, there is no age limit on making contri- butions to your traditional IRA. For more information, see Pub. 590-A. What is compensation? Generally, compen- sation is what you earn from working. Compen- sation includes wages, salaries, tips, professio- nal fees, bonuses, and other amounts you receive for providing personal services. The IRS treats as compensation any amount properly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compensa- tion) of Form W -2, Wage and T ax Statement, provided that this amount is reduced by any amount properly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans). Scholarship or fellowship payments are gen- erally compensation for this purpose only if re- ported in box 1 of your Form W -2. However, for tax years beginning after 2019, certain non -tui- tion fellowship and stipend payments not repor- ted to you on Form W -2 are treated as taxable compensation for IRA purposes. These amounts include taxable non -tuition fellowship and stipend payments made to aid you in the pursuit of graduate or postdoctoral study and in- cluded in your gross income under the rules dis- cussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 970, T ax Benefits for Education. Compensation also includes commissions and taxable alimony and separate maintenance payments. Self- employment income. If you are self- employed (a sole proprietor or a partner), compensation is the net earnings from your trade or business (provided your personal serv- ices are a material income -producing factor) re- duced by the total of: •The deduction for contributions made on your behalf to retirement plans, and •The deductible part of your self-employ- ment tax. Compensation includes earnings from self- employment even if they aren't subject to self- employment tax because of your religious beliefs. Nontaxable combat pay. For IRA purpo- ses, if you were a member of the U.S. Armed Forces, your compensation includes any non- taxable combat pay you receive. What isn't compensation? Compensation doesn't include any of the following items. •Earnings and profits from property, such as rental income, interest income, and divi- dend income. •Pension or annuity income. •Deferred compensation received (compen- sation payments postponed from a past year). TIP•Income from a partnership for which you don't provide services that are a material income-producing factor. •Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) payments reported on Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 1b. •Any amounts (other than combat pay) you exclude from income, such as foreign earned income and housing costs. When and How Can a Traditional IRA Be Opened? Y ou can open a traditional IRA at any time. However, the time for making contributions for any year is limited. See When Can Contribu- tions Be Made , later. Y ou can open different kinds of IRAs with a variety of organizations. Y ou can open an IRA at a bank or other financial institution or with a mu- tual fund or life insurance company. Y ou can also open an IRA through your stockbroker. Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code require- ments. Kinds of traditional IRAs. Y our traditional IRA can be an individual retirement account or an- nuity. It can be part of either a SEP or an em- ployer or employee association trust account. How Much Can Be Contributed? There are limits and other rules that affect the amount that can be contributed to a traditional IRA. These limits and other rules are explained below. Community property laws. Except as dis- cussed later under Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit , each spouse figures their limit separately, using their own compensation. This is the rule even in states with community property laws. Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis- sions paid in connection with your traditional IRA are subject to the contribution limit. Trustees' fees. T rustees' administrative fees aren't subject to the contribution limit. Qualified reservist repayments. If you are (or were) a member of a reserve component and you were ordered or called to active duty after September 11, 2001, you may be able to con- tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to any qualified reservist distributions you received. Y ou can make these repayment contributions even if they would cause your total contributions to the IRA to be more than the general limit on contributions. T o be eligible to make these re- payment contributions, you must have received a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA or from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similar arrangement. For more information, see Qualified reservist repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib- uted? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.Page 81 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 79 --- Page 82 --- Contributions on your behalf to a tradi- tional IRA reduce your limit for contribu- tions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs , later.) General limit. For 2024, the most that can be contributed to your traditional IRA is generally the smaller of the following amounts. •$7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older). •Y our taxable compensation (defined ear- lier) for the year. This is the most that can be contributed regard- less of whether the contributions are to one or more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of the contributions are nondeductible. (See Non- deductible Contributions , later.) Qualified re- servist repayments don't affect this limit. Example 1. Y ou are 34 years old and single and earned $24,000 in 2024. Y our IRA contribu- tions for 2024 are limited to $7,000. Example 2. Y ou are an unmarried college student working part time and earned $3,500 in 2024. Y our IRA contributions for 2024 are limi- ted to $3,500, the amount of your compensa- tion. Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit. For 2024, if you file a joint return and your taxable compensation is less than that of your spouse, the most that can be contributed for the year to your IRA is the smaller of the following amounts. 1.$7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older). 2.The total compensation includible in the gross income of both you and your spouse for the year, reduced by the following two amounts. a.Y our spouse's IRA contribution for the year to a traditional IRA. b.Any contribution for the year to a Roth IRA on behalf of your spouse. This means that the total combined contribu- tions that can be made for the year to your IRA and your spouse's IRA can be as much as $14,000 ($15,000 if only one of you is 50 or older, or $16,000 if both of you are 50 or older). When Can Contributions Be Made? As soon as you open your traditional IRA, con- tributions can be made to it through your chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator). Contributions must be in the form of money (cash, check, or money order). Property can't be contributed. Contributions must be made by due date. Contributions can be made to your traditional IRA for a year at any time during the year or by the due date for filing your return for that year, not including extensions. Designating year for which contribution is made. If an amount is contributed to your tradi- tional IRA between January 1 and April 15, you should tell the sponsor which year (the current year or the previous year) the contribution is for. If you don't tell the sponsor which year it is for, the sponsor can assume, and report to the IRS, CAUTION!that the contribution is for the current year (the year the sponsor received it). Filing before a contribution is made. Y ou can file your return claiming a traditional IRA contribution before the contribution is actually made. Generally, the contribution must be made by the due date of your return, not including ex- tensions. Contributions not required. Y ou don't have to contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax year, even if you can. How Much Can You Deduct? Generally, you can deduct the lesser of: •The contributions to your traditional IRA for the year, or •The general limit (or the Kay Bailey Hutchi- son Spousal IRA limit, if it applies). However, if you or your spouse were covered by an employer retirement plan, you may not be able to deduct this amount. See Limit if Covered by Employer Plan , later. Y ou may be able to claim a credit for contributions to your traditional IRA. For more information, see chapter 3 of Pub. 590-A. Trustees' fees. T rustees' administrative fees that are billed separately and paid in connection with your traditional IRA aren't deductible as IRA contributions. Y ou are also not able to de- duct these fees as an itemized deduction. Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis- sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as such, are deductible subject to the limits. Full deduction. If neither you nor your spouse was covered for any part of the year by an em- ployer retirement plan, you can take a deduction for total contributions to one or more traditional IRAs of up to the lesser of: •$7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older in 2024), or •100% of your compensation. This limit is reduced by any contributions made to a section 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf. Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA. In the case of a married couple with unequal compen- sation who file a joint return, the deduction for contributions to the traditional IRA of the spouse with less compensation is limited to the lesser of the following amounts. 1.$7,000 ($8,000 if the spouse with the lower compensation is 50 or older in 2024). 2.The total compensation includible in the gross income of both spouses for the year reduced by the following three amounts. a.The IRA deduction for the year of the spouse with the greater compensa- tion. b.Any designated nondeductible contri- bution for the year made on behalf of the spouse with the greater compensation. TIPc.Any contributions for the year to a Roth IRA on behalf of the spouse with the greater compensation. This limit is reduced by any contributions to a 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with the lesser compensation. Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa- rated (and didn't remarry) before the end of the year, you can't deduct any contributions to your spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal separa- tion, you can deduct only contributions to your own IRA. Y our deductions are subject to the rules for single individuals. Covered by an employer retirement plan. If you or your spouse was covered by an em- ployer retirement plan at any time during the year for which contributions were made, your deduction may be further limited. This is dis- cussed later under Limit if Covered by Employer Plan . Limits on the amount you can deduct don't affect the amount that can be contributed. See Nondeductible Contributions , later. Are You Covered by an Employer Plan? The Form W -2 you receive from your employer has a box used to indicate whether you were covered for the year. The “Retirement plan” box should be checked if you were covered. Reservists and volunteer firefighters should also see Situations in Which Y ou Aren’t Cov- ered , later. If you aren't certain whether you were cov- ered by your employer's retirement plan, you should ask your employer. Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de- duction, federal judges are covered by an em- ployer retirement plan. For Which Year(s) Are You Covered? Special rules apply to determine the tax years for which you are covered by an employer plan. These rules differ depending on whether the plan is a defined contribution plan or a defined benefit plan. Tax year. Y our tax year is the annual account- ing period you use to keep records and report income and expenses on your income tax re- turn. For almost all people, the tax year is the calendar year. Defined contribution plan. Generally, you are covered by a defined contribution plan for a tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated to your account for the plan year that ends with or within that tax year. A defined contribution plan is a plan that provides for a separate account for each person covered by the plan. T ypes of defined contribu- tion plans include profit -sharing plans, stock bo- nus plans, and money purchase pension plans. For additional information, see Pub. 590-A. Defined benefit plan. If you are eligible to par- ticipate in your employer's defined benefit plan for the plan year that ends within your tax year, Page 82 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 80 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 83 --- you are covered by the plan. This rule applies even if you: •Declined to participate in the plan, •Didn't make a required contribution, or •Didn't perform the minimum service re- quired to accrue a benefit for the year. A defined benefit plan is any plan that isn't a defined contribution plan. In a defined benefit plan, the level of benefits to be provided to each participant is spelled out in the plan. The plan administrator figures the amount needed to pro- vide those benefits, and those amounts are contributed to the plan. Defined benefit plans in- clude pension plans and annuity plans. No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for a plan year, you are covered by that plan even if you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the accrual. Situations in Which You Aren’t Covered Unless you are covered under another em- ployer plan, you aren't covered by an employer plan if you are in one of the situations described below. Social security or railroad retirement. Cov- erage under social security or railroad retire- ment isn't coverage under an employer retire- ment plan. Benefits from a previous employer's plan. If you receive retirement benefits from a previous employer's plan, you aren't covered by that plan. Reservists. If the only reason you participate in a plan is because you are a member of a re- serve unit of the U.S. Armed Forces, you may not be covered by the plan. Y ou aren't covered by the plan if both of the following conditions are met.1.The plan you participate in is established for its employees by: a.The United States, b.A state or political subdivision of a state, or c.An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) above. 2.Y ou didn't serve more than 90 days on ac- tive duty during the year (not counting duty for training). Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason you participate in a plan is because you are a volun- teer firefighter, you may not be covered by the plan. Y ou aren't covered by the plan if both of the following conditions are met. 1.The plan you participate in is established for its employees by: a.The United States, b.A state or political subdivision of a state, or c.An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) above. 2.Y our accrued retirement benefits at the be- ginning of the year won't provide more than $1,800 per year at retirement. Limit if Covered by Employer Plan If either you or your spouse was covered by an employer retirement plan, you may be entitled to only a partial (reduced) deduction or no de- duction at all, depending on your income and your filing status. Y our deduction begins to decrease (phase out) when your income rises above a certain amount and is eliminated altogether when it reaches a higher amount. These amounts vary depending on your filing status. T o determine if your deduction is subject to phaseout, you must determine your modified AGI and your filing status. See Filing status and Modified AGI , later. Then use T able 9 -1 or T a- ble 9 -2 to determine if the phaseout applies. Social security recipients. Instead of using T able 9 -1 or T able 9 -2, use the worksheets in Appendix B of Pub. 590 -A if, for the year, all of the following apply. •Y ou received social security benefits. •Y ou received taxable compensation. •Contributions were made to your traditional IRA. •Y ou or your spouse was covered by an em- ployer retirement plan. Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc- tion, your nondeductible contribution, and the taxable portion, if any, of your social security benefits. Deduction phaseout. If you are covered by an employer retirement plan and you didn't receive any social security retirement benefits, your IRA deduction may be reduced or eliminated de- pending on your filing status and modified AGI as shown in T able 9 -1. If your spouse is covered. If you aren't covered by an employer retirement plan, but your spouse is, and you didn't receive any so- cial security benefits, your IRA deduction may be reduced or eliminated entirely depending on your filing status and modified AGI as shown in T able 9 -2. Filing status. Y our filing status depends pri- marily on your marital status. For this purpose, you need to know if your filing status is single, head of household, married filing jointly, qualify- ing surviving spouse, or married filing sepa- rately. If you need more information on filing sta- tus, see chapter 2 . Lived apart from spouse. If you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year and you file a separate return, your filing status, for this purpose, is single. Modified AGI. Y ou may be able to use Work- sheet 9 -1 to figure your modified AGI. However, if you made contributions to your IRA for 2024 and received a distribution from your IRA in 2024, see Pub. 590-A. Don't assume that your modified AGI is the same as your compensation. Y our modified AGI may include income in addition to your compensation (discussed ear- lier), such as interest, dividends, and income from IRA distributions. When filing Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, refigure the AGI amount on line 11 without taking into account any of the following amounts. •IRA deduction. •Student loan interest deduction. •Foreign earned income exclusion. •Foreign housing exclusion or deduction. •Exclusion of qualified savings bond interest shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989. •Exclusion of employer-provided adoption benefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses. CAUTION!T able 9-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by Retirement Plan at Work If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction . IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... Single or Head of household $77,000 or less a full deduction. more than $77,000 but less than $87,000a partial deduction. $87,000 or more no deduction. Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse $123,000 or less a full deduction. more than $123,000 but less than $143,000a partial deduction. $143,000 or more no deduction. Married filing separately2less than $10,000 a partial deduction. $10,000 or more no deduction. 1 Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified AGI , later. 2 If you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose (therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single” column).Page 83 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 81 --- Page 84 --- This is your modified AGI.T able 9-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Aren’t Covered by Retirement Plan at Work If you aren't covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction . IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... Single, Head of household, or Qualifying surviving spouseany amount a full deduction. Married filing jointly or separately with a spouse who isn't covered by a plan at workany amount a full deduction. Married filing jointly with a spouse who is covered by a plan at work$230,000 or less a full deduction. more than $230,000 but less than $240,000a partial deduction. $240,000 or more no deduction. Married filing separately with a spouse who is covered by a plan at work2less than $10,000 a partial deduction. $10,000 or more no deduction. 1 Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified AGI , on previous page. 2 Y ou are entitled to the full deduction if you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year.Page 84 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 82 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 85 --- Both contributions for 2024 and distribu- tions in 2024. If all three of the following apply, any IRA distributions you received in 2024 may be partly tax free and partly taxable. •Y ou received distributions in 2024 from one or more traditional IRAs. •Y ou made contributions to a traditional IRA for 2024. •Some of those contributions may be non- deductible contributions. If this is your situation, you must figure the taxa- ble part of the traditional IRA distribution before you can figure your modified AGI. T o do this, you can use Worksheet 1-1 in Pub. 590-B. If at least one of the above doesn't apply, fig- ure your modified AGI using Worksheet 9 -1. How to figure your reduced IRA deduction. Y ou can figure your reduced IRA deduction for Form 1040 or 1040 -SR by using the worksheets in chapter 1 of Pub. 590 -A. Also, the Instruc- tions for Form 1040 include similar worksheets that you may be able to use instead. Reporting Deductible Contributions When filing Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter your IRA deduction on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 20. Nondeductible Contributions Although your deduction for IRA contributions may be reduced or eliminated, contributions can be made to your IRA up to the general limit or, if it applies, the Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit . The difference between your total permitted contributions and your IRA de- duction, if any, is your nondeductible contribu- tion. Example. Y ou are 30 years old and single. In 2024, you were covered by a retirement plan at work. Y our salary was $67,000. Y our modified AGI was $90,000. Y ou made a $7,000 IRA con- tribution for 2024. Because you were covered by a retirement plan and your modified AGI was over $87,000, you can't deduct the $7,000 IRA contribution. Y ou must designate this contribu- tion as a nondeductible contribution by report- ing it on Form 8606, as explained next.Form 8606. T o designate contributions as non- deductible, you must file Form 8606. Y ou don't have to designate a contribution as nondeductible until you file your tax return. When you file, you can even designate other- wise deductible contributions as nondeductible. Y ou must file Form 8606 to report nondeduc- tible contributions even if you don't have to file a tax return for the year. A Form 8606 isn't used for the year that you make a rollover from a qualified re- tirement plan to a traditional IRA and the rollover includes nontaxable amounts. In those situations, a Form 8606 is completed for the year you take a distribution from that IRA. See Form 8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly T axable , later. Failure to report nondeductible contribu- tions. If you don't report nondeductible contri- butions, all of the contributions to your tradi- tional IRA will be treated as deductible contributions when withdrawn. All distributions from your IRA will be taxed unless you can show, with satisfactory evidence, that nonde- ductible contributions were made. Penalty for overstatement. If you overstate the amount of nondeductible contributions on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement, unless it was due to reasonable cause. Penalty for failure to file Form 8606. Y ou will have to pay a $50 penalty if you don't file a required Form 8606, unless you can prove that the failure was due to reasonable cause. Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu- tions. As long as contributions are within the contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains on contributions (deductible or nondeductible) will be taxed until they are distributed. See When Can Y ou Withdraw or Use IRA Assets , later. Cost basis. Y ou will have a cost basis in your traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible contributions. Y our cost basis is the sum of the nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus any withdrawals or distributions of nondeducti- ble contributions. CAUTION!Inherited IRAs If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called a beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or entity the owner chooses to receive the benefits of the IRA after the owner dies. Beneficiaries of a traditional IRA must include in their gross in- come any taxable distributions they receive. Inherited from spouse. If you inherit a tradi- tional IRA from your spouse, you generally have the following three choices. 1.T reat it as your own IRA by designating yourself as the account owner. 2.T reat it as your own by rolling it over into your IRA, or to the extent it is taxable, into a: a.Qualified employer plan, b.Qualified employee annuity plan (sec- tion 403(a) plan), c.T ax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) plan), or d.Deferred compensation plan of a state or local government (section 457 plan). 3.T reat yourself as the beneficiary rather than treating the IRA as your own. Treating it as your own. Y ou will be consid- ered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your own if: •Contributions (including rollover contribu- tions) are made to the inherited IRA, or •Y ou don't take the required minimum distri- bution for a year as a beneficiary of the IRA. Y ou will only be considered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your own if: •Y ou are the sole beneficiary of the IRA, and •Y ou have an unlimited right to withdraw amounts from it. However, if you receive a distribution from your deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll that distribution over into your own IRA within the 60-day time limit, as long as the distribution isn't a required distribution, even if you aren't the sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse's IRA. Inherited from someone other than spouse. If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone other than your deceased spouse, you can't treat the Worksheet 9-1. Figuring Your Modified AGI Keep for Y our Records Use this worksheet to figure your modified AGI for traditional IRA purposes. 1.Enter your AGI from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 11, figured without taking into account the amount from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 20 ....................................................... 1. 2.Enter any student loan interest deduction from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 21 .................... 2. 3.Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form 2555, line 45 ................. 3. 4.Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 .................................. 4. 5.Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 ............................. 5. 6.Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form 8839, line 28 .................. 6. 7.Add lines 1 through 6. This is your modified AGI for traditional IRA purposes ...................... 7. Page 85 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 83 --- Page 86 --- inherited IRA as your own. This means that you can't make any contributions to the IRA. It also means you can't roll over any amounts into or out of the inherited IRA. However, you can make a trustee -to-trustee transfer as long as the IRA into which amounts are being moved is set up and maintained in the name of the deceased IRA owner for the benefit of you as beneficiary. For more information, see Inherited IRAs un- der Rollover From One IRA Into Another , later. Can You Move Retirement Plan Assets? Y ou can transfer, tax free, assets (money or property) from other retirement plans (including traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. Y ou can make the following kinds of transfers. •T ransfers from one trustee to another. •Rollovers. •T ransfers incident to a divorce. Transfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain condi- tions, you can move assets from a traditional IRA or from a designated Roth account to a Roth IRA. Y ou can also move assets from a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. See Can Y ou Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA? under Roth IRAs, later. Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from one trustee directly to another, either at your re- quest or at the trustee's request, isn't a rollover. This includes the situation where the current trustee issues a check to the new trustee, but gives it to you to deposit. Because there is no distribution to you, the transfer is tax free. Be- cause it isn't a rollover, it isn't affected by the 1-year waiting period required between roll- overs, discussed later under Rollover From One IRA Into Another . For information about direct transfers to IRAs from retirement plans other than IRAs, see Can Y ou Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 and Can Y ou Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA? in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A. Rollovers Generally, a rollover is a tax -free distribution to you of cash or other assets from one retirement plan that you contribute (roll over) to another re- tirement plan. The contribution to the second retirement plan is called a rollover contribution. Note. An amount rolled over tax free from one retirement plan to another is generally in- cludible in income when it is distributed from the second plan. Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA. Y ou can roll over amounts from the following plans into a traditional IRA. •A traditional IRA. •An employer's qualified retirement plan for its employees. •A deferred compensation plan of a state or local government (section 457 plan). •A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) plan).Treatment of rollovers. Y ou can't deduct a rollover contribution, but you must report the rollover distribution on your tax return as dis- cussed later under Reporting rollovers from IRAs and Reporting rollovers from employer plans . Rollover notice. A written explanation of rollover treatment must be given to you by the plan (other than an IRA) making the distribution. See Written explanation to recipients in Pub. 590-A. Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA. Y ou may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu- tion from your traditional IRA into a qualified plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav- ings Plan (for federal employees), deferred compensation plans of state or local govern- ments (section 457 plans), and tax -sheltered annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part of the distribution that you can roll over is the part that would otherwise be taxable (includible in your income). Qualified plans may, but aren't re- quired to, accept such rollovers. Time limit for making a rollover contribu- tion. Y ou must generally make the rollover con- tribution by the 60th day after the day you re- ceive the distribution from your traditional IRA or your employer's plan. The IRS may waive the 60 -day requirement where the failure to do so would be against equity or good conscience, such as in the event of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond your reasonable control. For more information, see Can Y ou Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. Extension of rollover period. If an amount distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen deposit at any time during the 60 -day period al- lowed for a rollover, special rules extend the roll- over period. For more information, see Can Y ou Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. Rollover From One IRA Into Another Y ou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the as- sets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest them within 60 days in the same or another tra- ditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you can't deduct the amount that you reinvest in an IRA. Waiting period between rollovers. Generally, if you make a tax -free rollover of any part of a distribution from a traditional IRA, you can't, within a 1 -year period, make a tax -free rollover of any later distribution from that same IRA. Y ou also can't make a tax -free rollover of any amount distributed, within the same 1 -year pe- riod, from the IRA into which you made the tax-free rollover. The 1- year period begins on the date you re- ceive the IRA distribution, not on the date you roll it over into an IRA. Rules apply to the num- ber of rollovers you can have with your tradi- tional IRAs. See Application of one -rollover limi- tation next. Application of one -rollover limitation. Y ou can make only one rollover from an IRA to an-other (or the same) IRA in any 1 -year period, re- gardless of the number of IRAs you own. The limit applies by aggregating all of an individual's IRAs, including SEP and SIMPLE IRAs, as well as traditional and Roth IRAs, effectively treating them as one IRA for purposes of the limit. How- ever, trustee -to-trustee transfers between IRAs aren't limited and rollovers from traditional IRAs to Roth IRAs (conversions) aren't limited. Example. Y ou have three traditional IRAs: IRA- 1, IRA -2, and IRA -3. Y ou didn't take any distributions from your IRAs in 2024. On Janu- ary 1, 2025, you took a distribution from IRA -1 and rolled it over into IRA -2 on the same day. For 2025, you can't roll over any other 2024 IRA distribution, including a rollover distribution in- volving IRA -3. This wouldn’t apply to a trustee-to- trustee transfer or a Roth IRA conver- sion. Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets from a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the with- drawal tax free and keep the rest of it. The amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex- cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible contributions). The amount you keep may be subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri- butions, discussed later under What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes . Required distributions. Amounts that must be distributed during a particular year under the required minimum distribution rules (discussed later) aren't eligible for rollover treatment. Inherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRA from your spouse, you can generally roll it over, or you can choose to make the inherited IRA your own. See T reating it as your own , earlier. Not inherited from spouse. If you inherit a traditional IRA from someone other than your spouse, you can't roll it over or allow it to receive a rollover contribution. Y ou must withdraw the IRA assets within a certain period. For more in- formation, see When Must Y ou Withdraw As- sets? (Required Minimum Distributions) in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B. Reporting rollovers from IRAs. Report any rollover from one traditional IRA to the same or another traditional IRA on Form 1040 or 1040-SR as follows. Enter the total amount of the distribution on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4a. If the total amount on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4a, was rolled over, enter zero on Form 1040 or 1040- SR, line 4b. If the total distribution wasn't rolled over, enter the taxable portion of the part that wasn't rolled over on Form 1040 or 1040- SR, line 4b. Enter “Rollover” next to Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4b. For more information, see the Instructions for Form 1040. If you rolled over the distribution into a quali- fied plan (other than an IRA) or you make the rollover in 2025, attach a statement explaining what you did.Page 86 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 84 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 87 --- Rollover From Employer's Plan Into an IRA Y ou can roll over into a traditional IRA all or part of an eligible rollover distribution you receive from your (or your deceased spouse's): •Employer's qualified pension, profit-shar- ing, or stock bonus plan; •Annuity plan; •T ax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) plan); or •Governmental deferred compensation plan (section 457 plan). A qualified plan is one that meets the re- quirements of the Internal Revenue Code. Eligible rollover distribution. Generally, an eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or part of the balance to your credit in a quali- fied retirement plan except the following. 1.A required minimum distribution (ex- plained later under When Must Y ou With- draw IRA Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions) ). 2.A hardship distribution. 3.Any of a series of substantially equal peri- odic distributions paid at least once a year over: a.Y our lifetime or life expectancy, b.The lifetimes or life expectancies of you and your beneficiary, or c.A period of 10 years or more. 4.Corrective distributions of excess contribu- tions or excess deferrals, and any income allocable to the excess, or of excess an- nual additions and any allocable gains. 5.A loan treated as a distribution because it doesn't satisfy certain requirements either when made or later (such as upon de- fault), unless the participant's accrued benefits are reduced (offset) to repay the loan. For more information, see Plan loan offsets under Time Limit for Making a Roll- over Contribution in Pub. 590-A. 6.Dividends on employer securities. 7.The cost of life insurance coverage. Y our rollover into a traditional IRA may in- clude both amounts that would be taxable and amounts that wouldn’t be taxable if they were distributed to you but not rolled over. T o the ex- tent the distribution is rolled over into a tradi- tional IRA, it isn’t includible in your income. Any nontaxable amounts that you roll over into your traditional IRA become part of your basis (cost) in your IRAs. T o recover your basis when you take distribu- tions from your IRA, you must complete Form 8606 for the year of the distribution. See Form 8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly T axable , later. Rollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct transfer from a deceased employee's qualified pension, profit- sharing, or stock bonus plan; an- nuity plan; tax -sheltered annuity (section 403(b)) plan; or governmental deferred com- pensation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to TIPreceive the distribution on your behalf can be treated as an eligible rollover distribution if you are the designated beneficiary of the plan and not the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated as an inherited IRA. For more information about inherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs , earlier. Reporting rollovers from employer plans. Enter the total distribution (before income tax or other deductions were withheld) on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4a. This amount should be shown in box 1 of Form 1099 -R, Distributions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit- Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- tracts, etc. From this amount, subtract any con- tributions (usually shown in box 5 of Form 1099- R) that were taxable to you when made. From that result, subtract the amount that was rolled over either directly or within 60 days of re- ceiving the distribution. Enter the remaining amount, even if zero, on Form 1040 or 1040- SR, line 4b. Also, enter "Rollover" next to Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b. Transfers Incident to Divorce If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred from your spouse or former spouse to you by a divorce or separate maintenance decree or a written document related to such a decree, the interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is tax free. For detailed information, see Distribu- tions under divorce or similar proceedings (al- ternate payees) under Rollover From Employ- er's Plan Into an IRA in Pub. 590-A. Converting From Any Traditional IRA to a Roth IRA Allowable conversions. Y ou can withdraw all or part of the assets from a traditional IRA and reinvest them (within 60 days) in a Roth IRA. The amount that you withdraw and timely con- tribute (convert) to the Roth IRA is called a con- version contribution. If properly (and timely) rol- led over, the 10% additional tax on early distributions won't apply. However, a part or all of the conversion contribution from your tradi- tional IRA is included in your gross income. Required distributions. Y ou can't convert amounts that must be distributed from your tra- ditional IRA for a particular year (including the calendar year in which you reach age 73 under the required minimum distribution rules (dis- cussed later)). Income. Y ou must include in your gross in- come distributions from a traditional IRA that you would have had to include in income if you hadn't converted them into a Roth IRA. These amounts are normally included in income on your return for the year that you converted them from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. Y ou don't include in gross income any part of a distribution from a traditional IRA that is a re- turn of your basis , as discussed later. Y ou must file Form 8606 to report 2024 con- versions from traditional, SEP , or SIMPLE IRAs to a Roth IRA in 2024 (unless you recharacter- ized the entire amount) and to figure the amount to include in income.If you must include any amount in your gross income, you may have to increase your with- holding or make estimated tax payments. See chapter 4 . Recharacterizations Y ou may be able to treat a contribution made to one type of IRA as having been made to a dif- ferent type of IRA. This is called recharacteriz- ing the contribution. See Can Y ou Move Retire- ment Plan Assets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590 -A for more detailed information. How to recharacterize a contribution. T o re- characterize a contribution, you must generally have the contribution transferred from the first IRA (the one to which it was made) to the sec- ond IRA in a trustee -to-trustee transfer. If the transfer is made by the due date (including ex- tensions) for your tax return for the year during which the contribution was made, you can elect to treat the contribution as having been origi- nally made to the second IRA instead of to the first IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, you must do all three of the following. •Include in the transfer any net income allo- cable to the contribution. If there was a loss, the net income you must transfer may be a negative amount. •Report the recharacterization on your tax return for the year during which the contri- bution was made. •T reat the contribution as having been made to the second IRA on the date that it was actually made to the first IRA. No recharacterizations of conversions made in 2018 or later. A conversion of a tradi- tional IRA to a Roth IRA, and a rollover from any other eligible retirement plan to a Roth IRA, made in tax years beginning after tax year 2017, can’t be recharacterized as having been made to a traditional IRA. If you made a conver- sion in the 2017 tax year, you had until the due date (including extensions) for filing the return for that tax year to recharacterize it. No deduction allowed. Y ou can't deduct the contribution to the first IRA. Any net income you transfer with the recharacterized contribution is treated as earned in the second IRA. How do you recharacterize a contribution? T o recharacterize a contribution, you must notify both the trustee of the first IRA (the one to which the contribution was actually made) and the trustee of the second IRA (the one to which the contribution is being moved) that you have elected to treat the contribution as having been made to the second IRA rather than the first. Y ou must make the notifications by the date of the transfer. Only one notification is required if both IRAs are maintained by the same trustee. The notification(s) must include all of the follow- ing information. •The type and amount of the contribution to the first IRA that is to be recharacterized. •The date on which the contribution was made to the first IRA and the year for which it was made. •A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the Page 87 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 85 --- Page 88 --- amount of the contribution and any net in- come (or loss) allocable to the contribution to the trustee of the second IRA. •The name of the trustee of the first IRA and the name of the trustee of the second IRA. •Any additional information needed to make the transfer. Reporting a recharacterization. If you elect to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as a contribution to another IRA, you must report the recharacterization on your tax return as directed by Form 8606 and its instructions. Y ou must treat the contribution as having been made to the second IRA. When Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets? There are rules limiting use of your IRA assets and distributions from it. Violation of the rules generally results in additional taxes in the year of violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes , later. Contributions returned before the due date of return. If you made IRA contributions in 2024, you can withdraw them tax free by the due date of your return. If you have an extension of time to file your return, you can withdraw them tax free by the extended due date. Y ou can do this if, for each contribution you with- draw, both of the following conditions apply. •Y ou didn't take a deduction for the contri- bution. •Y ou withdraw any interest or other income earned on the contribution. Y ou can take into account any loss on the contribution while it was in the IRA when figuring the amount that must be withdrawn. If there was a loss, the net income earned on the contribution may be a negative amount. Note. T o figure the amount you must with- draw, see Worksheet 1 -4 under When Can Y ou Withdraw or Use Assets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. Earnings includible in income. Y ou must include in income any earnings on the contribu- tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in- come for the year in which you made the contri- butions, not in the year in which you withdraw them. Generally, except for any part of a with- drawal that is a return of nondeductible contributions (basis), any withdrawal of your contributions after the due date (or exten- ded due date) of your return will be treated as a taxable distribution. Excess contributions can also be recovered tax free as discussed under What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes , later. Early distributions tax. The 10% additional tax on distributions made before you reach age 591/2 doesn't apply to these tax -free withdraw- als of your contributions. However, the distribu- tion of interest or other income must be repor- ted on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution qualifies for an exception to the age 591/2 rule, it will be subject to this tax. See Early Distribu- CAUTION!tions under What Acts Result in Penalties or Ad- ditional T axes? in Pub. 590-B. When Must You Withdraw IRA Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions) Y ou can't keep funds in a traditional IRA indefi- nitely. Eventually, they must be distributed. If there are no distributions, or if the distributions aren't large enough, you may have to pay a 25% excise tax on the amount not distributed as re- quired. See Excess Accumulations (Insufficient Distributions) , later. The requirements for dis- tributing IRA funds differ depending on whether you are the IRA owner or the beneficiary of a decedent's IRA. Required minimum distribution. The amount that must be distributed each year is referred to as the “required minimum distribution.” Distributions not eligible for rollover. Amounts that must be distributed (required min- imum distributions) during a particular year aren't eligible for rollover treatment. IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi- tional IRA, you must generally start receiving distributions from your IRA by April 1 of the year following the year in which you reach age 73. April 1 of the year following the year in which you reach age 73 is referred to as the “required beginning date.” Distributions by the required beginning date. Y ou must receive at least a minimum amount for each year starting with the year you reach age 73. If you don't (or didn't) receive that minimum amount in the year you become age 73, then you must receive distributions for the year you become age 73 by April 1 of the next year. If an IRA owner dies after reaching age 73 but before April 1 of the next year, no minimum distribution is required because death occurred before the required beginning date. Individuals who reach age 72 after De- cember 31, 2022, may delay receiving their required minimum distributions until April 1 of the year following the year in which they reach age 73. Even if you begin receiving distribu- tions before you attain age 72, you must begin figuring and receiving re- quired minimum distributions by your required beginning date. Distributions after the required beginning date. The required minimum distribution for any year after the year you turn age 72 must be made by December 31 of that later year. Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of a decedent's traditional IRA, the requirements for distributions from that IRA generally depend on whether the IRA owner died before or after the required beginning date for distributions. More information. For more information, in- cluding how to figure your required minimum distribution each year and how to figure your re- quired distribution if you are a beneficiary of a TIP CAUTION!decedent's IRA, see When Must Y ou Withdraw Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions) in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B. Are Distributions Taxable? In general, distributions from a traditional IRA are taxable in the year you receive them. Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from traditional IRAs being taxable in the year you re- ceive them are: •Rollovers; •Qualified charitable distributions (QCDs) , discussed later; •T ax-free withdrawals of contributions , dis- cussed earlier; and •The return of nondeductible contributions, discussed later under Distributions Fully or Partly T axable . Although a conversion of a traditional IRA is considered a rollover for Roth IRA purposes, it isn't an exception to the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA are taxable in the year you receive them. Con- version distributions are includible in your gross income subject to this rule and the special rules for conversions explained in Converting From Any T raditional IRA Into a Roth IRA under Can Y ou Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. Qualified charitable distributions (QCDs). A QCD is generally a nontaxable distribution made directly by the trustee of your IRA to an organization eligible to receive tax deductible contributions. See Qualified Charitable Distribu- tions in Pub. 590-B for more information. A QCD will count towards your required minimum distribution. See Qualified charitable distributions under Are Dis- tributions T axable? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590 -B for more information. Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi- tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed as ordinary income. No special treatment. In figuring your tax, you can't use the 10 -year tax option or capital gain treatment that applies to lump -sum distributions from qualified retirement plans. Distributions Fully or Partly Taxable Distributions from your traditional IRA may be fully or partly taxable, depending on whether your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu- tions. Fully taxable. If only deductible contributions were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if you have more than one), you have no basis in your IRA. Because you have no basis in your IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when re- ceived. See Reporting taxable distributions on your return , later. Partly taxable. If you made nondeductible contributions or rolled over any after -tax amounts to any of your traditional IRAs, you have a cost basis (investment in the contract) CAUTION! TIPPage 88 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 86 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 89 --- equal to the amount of those contributions. These nondeductible contributions aren't taxed when they are distributed to you. They are a re- turn of your investment in your IRA. Only the part of the distribution that repre- sents nondeductible contributions and rolled over after -tax amounts (your cost basis) is tax free. If nondeductible contributions have been made or after -tax amounts have been rolled over to your IRA, distributions consist partly of nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly of deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (if there are any). Until all of your basis has been distributed, each distribution is partly non- taxable and partly taxable. Form 8606. Y ou must complete Form 8606 and attach it to your return if you receive a distri- bution from a traditional IRA and have ever made nondeductible contributions or rolled over after- tax amounts to any of your traditional IRAs. Using the form, you will figure the nontax- able distributions for 2024 and your total IRA basis for 2024 and earlier years. Note. If you are required to file Form 8606 but you aren't required to file an income tax re- turn, you must still file Form 8606. Send it to the IRS at the time and place you would otherwise file an income tax return. Distributions reported on Form 1099 -R. If you receive a distribution from your traditional IRA, you will receive Form 1099 -R, or a similar statement. IRA distributions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Form 1099 -R. The number or letter codes in box 7 tell you what type of distribution you received from your IRA. Withholding. Federal income tax is withheld from distributions from traditional IRAs unless you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap- ter 4 . IRA distributions delivered outside the United States. In general, if you are a U.S. citi- zen or resident alien and your home address is outside the United States or its territories, you can't choose exemption from withholding on distributions from your traditional IRA. Reporting taxable distributions on your re- turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ- ing early distributions, on Form 1040 or 1040- SR, line 4b (no entry is required on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4a). If only part of the dis- tribution is taxable, enter the total amount on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4a, and the taxable part on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b. What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional Taxes? The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for retirement savings can be offset by additional taxes and penalties if you don't follow the rules. There are additions to the regular tax for us- ing your IRA funds in prohibited transactions. There are also additional taxes for the following activities. •Investing in collectibles. •Having unrelated business income; see Pub. 590-B.•Making excess contributions. •T aking early distributions. •Allowing excess amounts to accumulate (failing to take required distributions). There are penalties for overstating the amount of nondeductible contributions and for failure to file a Form 8606, if required. Prohibited Transactions Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im- proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your beneficiary, or any disqualified person. Disqualified persons include your fiduciary and members of your family (spouse, ancestor, lineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal descendent). The following are examples of prohibited transactions with a traditional IRA. •Borrowing money from it; see Pub. 590-B. •Selling property to it. •Using it as security for a loan. •Buying property for personal use (present or future) with IRA funds. Effect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans- action in connection with your traditional IRA account at any time during the year, the account stops being an IRA as of the first day of that year. Effect on you or your beneficiary. If your ac- count stops being an IRA because you or your beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction, the account is treated as distributing all its as- sets to you at their fair market values on the first day of the year. If the total of those values is more than your basis in the IRA, you will have a taxable gain that is includible in your income. For information on figuring your gain and report- ing it in income, see Are Distributions T axable , earlier. The distribution may be subject to addi- tional taxes or penalties. Taxes on prohibited transactions. If some- one other than the owner or beneficiary of a tra- ditional IRA engages in a prohibited transaction, that person may be liable for certain taxes. In general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of the prohibited transaction and a 100% additional tax if the transaction isn't corrected. More information. For more information on prohibited transactions, see What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. Investment in Collectibles If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, the amount invested is considered distributed to you in the year invested. Y ou may have to pay the 10% additional tax on early distributions , discussed later. Collectibles. These include: •Artworks, •Rugs, •Antiques, •Metals, •Gems,•Stamps, •Coins, •Alcoholic beverages, and •Certain other tangible personal property. Exception. Y our IRA can invest in one -, one-half-, one-quarter-, or one-tenth-ounce U.S. gold coins, or one -ounce silver coins minted by the T reasury Department. It can also invest in certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver, palladium, and platinum bullion. Excess Contributions Generally, an excess contribution is the amount contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the year that is more than the smaller of: •The maximum deductible amount for the year (for 2024, this is $7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older)); or •Y our taxable compensation for the year. An excess contribution could be the result of your contribution, your spouse's contribution, your employer's contribution, or an improper rollover contribution. If your employer makes contributions on your behalf to a SEP IRA, see chapter 2 of Pub. 560. Tax on excess contributions. In general, if the excess contributions for a year aren't with- drawn by the date your return for the year is due (including extensions), you are subject to a 6% tax. Y ou must pay the 6% tax each year on ex- cess amounts that remain in your traditional IRA at the end of your tax year. The tax can't be more than 6% of the combined value of all your IRAs as of the end of your tax year. The addi- tional tax is figured on Form 5329. Excess contributions withdrawn by due date of return. Y ou won't have to pay the 6% tax if you withdraw an excess contribution made during a tax year and you also withdraw interest or other income earned on the excess contribu- tion. Y ou must complete your withdrawal by the date your tax return for that year is due, includ- ing extensions. How to treat withdrawn contributions. Don't include in your gross income an excess contribution that you withdraw from your tradi- tional IRA before your tax return is due if both the following conditions are met. •No deduction was allowed for the excess contribution. •Y ou withdraw the interest or other income earned on the excess contribution. Y ou can take into account any loss on the con- tribution while it was in the IRA when figuring the amount that must be withdrawn. If there was a loss, the net income you must withdraw may be a negative amount. How to treat withdrawn interest or other income. Y ou must include in your gross in- come the interest or other income that was earned on the excess contribution. Report it on your return for the year in which the excess con- tribution was made. Y our withdrawal of interest or other income may be subject to an additional 10% tax on early distributions , discussed later. Beginning on or after December 29, 2022, the 10% additional tax will not apply to your Page 89 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 87 --- Page 90 --- withdrawal of interest or other income, if with- drawn on or before the due date (including ex- tensions) of the income tax return. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Excess contributions withdrawn after due date of return. In general, you must include all distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional IRA in your gross income. However, if the fol- lowing conditions are met, you can withdraw ex- cess contributions from your IRA and not in- clude the amount withdrawn in your gross income. •T otal contributions (other than rollover con- tributions) for 2024 to your IRA weren't more than $7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older). •Y ou didn't take a deduction for the excess contribution being withdrawn. The withdrawal can take place at any time, even after the due date, including extensions, for fil- ing your tax return for the year. Excess contribution deducted in an earlier year. If you deducted an excess contribution in an earlier year for which the total contributions weren't more than the maximum deductible amount for that year (see the following table), you can still remove the excess from your tradi- tional IRA and not include it in your gross in- come. T o do this, file Form 1040 -X for that year and don't deduct the excess contribution on the amended return. Generally, you can file an amended return within 3 years after you filed your return or 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whichever is later. Year(s)Contribution limitContribution limit if 50 or older at the end of the year 2023 $6,500 $7,500 2019 through 2022$6,000 $7,000 2013 through 2018$5,500 $6,500 2008 through 2012$5,000 $6,000 2006 or 2007 $4,000 $5,000 2005 $4,000 $4,500 2002 through 2004$3,000 $3,500 1997 through 2001$2,000 — before 1997 $2,250 — Excess due to incorrect rollover informa- tion. If an excess contribution in your traditional IRA is the result of a rollover and the excess oc- curred because the information the plan was re- quired to give you was incorrect, you can with- draw the excess contribution. The limits mentioned above are increased by the amount of the excess that is due to the incorrect infor- mation. Y ou will have to amend your return for the year in which the excess occurred to correct the reporting of the rollover amounts in that year. Don't include in your gross income the part of the excess contribution caused by the in- correct information. For more information, see Excess Contributions under What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes? in Pub. 590-A. Early Distributions Y ou must include early distributions of taxable amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross income. Early distributions are also subject to an additional 10% tax. See the discussion of Form 5329 under Reporting Additional T axes , later, to figure and report the tax. Early distributions defined. Early distribu- tions are generally amounts distributed from your traditional IRA account or annuity before you are age 591/2. Age 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under age 591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on the distribution of any assets (money or other prop- erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributions be- fore you are age 591/2 are called early distribu- tions. The 10% additional tax applies to the part of the distribution that you have to include in gross income. It is in addition to any regular income tax on that amount. After age 591/2 and before age 73. After you reach age 591/2, you can receive distribu- tions without having to pay the 10% additional tax. Even though you can receive distributions after you reach age 591/2, distributions aren't re- quired until you reach age 73. See When Must Y ou Withdraw IRA Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions) , earlier. Exceptions. There are several exceptions to the age 591/2 rule. Even if you receive a distribu- tion before you are age 591/2, you may not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are in one of the following situations. •Y ou have unreimbursed medical expenses that are more than 7.5% of your AGI. •The distribution is for the cost of your medi- cal insurance due to a period of unemploy- ment. •Y ou are totally and permanently disabled. •Y ou have been certified as having a termi- nal illness. •Y ou are the beneficiary of a deceased IRA owner. •Y ou are receiving distributions in the form of a series of substantially equal periodic payments. •The distribution is income on a corrective distribution. •The distribution is for your qualified higher education expenses. •Y ou use the distributions to buy, build, or rebuild a first home. •The distribution is due to an IRS levy of the IRA or retirement plan. •The distribution is a qualified reservist dis- tribution. •Y ou are a victim of domestic abuse. •The distribution is for eligible emergency personal expenses. Most of these exceptions are explained under Early Distributions under What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B. Note. Distributions that are timely and prop- erly rolled over , as discussed earlier, aren't sub- ject to either regular income tax or the 10% ad- ditional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess contributions after the due date of your return are also tax free and therefore not subject to the 10% additional tax. (See Excess contributions withdrawn after due date of return , earlier.) This also applies to transfers incident to divorce , as discussed earlier. Receivership distributions. Early distribu- tions (with or without your consent) from sav- ings institutions placed in receivership are sub- ject to this tax unless one of the exceptions listed earlier applies. This is true even if the dis- tribution is from a receiver that is a state agency. Additional 10% tax. The additional tax on early distributions is 10% of the amount of the early distribution that you must include in your gross income. This tax is in addition to any reg- ular income tax resulting from including the dis- tribution in income. Nondeductible contributions. The tax on early distributions doesn't apply to the part of a distribution that represents a return of your non- deductible contributions (basis). More information. For more information on early distributions, see What Acts Result in Pen- alties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B. Excess Accumulations (Insufficient Distributions) Y ou can't keep amounts in your traditional IRA indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving distributions by April 1 of the year following the year in which you reach age 73. The required minimum distribution for any year after the year in which you reach age 73 must be made by December 31 of that later year. Individuals who reach age 72 after De- cember 31, 2022, may delay receiving their required minimum distributions until April 1 of the year following the year in which they reach age 73. Tax on excess. If distributions are less than the required minimum distribution for the year, you may have to pay a 25% excise tax for that year on the amount not distributed as required. The excise tax on distributions that are less than the required minimum distri- bution amount is reduced to 25% for tax years beginning after December 29, 2022. Also, there is an additional reduction to 10% for taxpayers meeting additional requirements. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Request to waive the tax. If the excess accu- mulation is due to reasonable error, and you have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the insufficient distribution, you can request that the tax be waived. If you believe you qualify for this relief, attach a statement of explanation and complete Form 5329 as instructed under Waiver of tax for reasonable cause in the In- structions for Form 5329. TIP TIPPage 90 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 88 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 91 --- Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take required distributions because you have a tradi- tional IRA invested in a contract issued by an in- surance company that is in state insurer delin- quency proceedings, the 25% excise tax doesn't apply if the conditions and requirements of Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied. More information. For more information on excess accumulations, see What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B. Reporting Additional Taxes Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report the tax on excess contributions, early distribu- tions, and excess accumulations. Filing a tax return. If you must file an individ- ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter the total additional taxes due on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 8. Not filing a tax return. If you don't have to file a tax return but do have to pay one of the addi- tional taxes mentioned earlier, file the comple- ted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time and place you would have filed your Form 1040 or 1040- SR. Be sure to include your address on page 1 and your signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but don't attach, a check or money or- der made payable to “United States T reasury” for the tax you owe, as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social security number and “2024 Form 5329” on your check or money order. Form 5329 not required. Y ou don't have to use Form 5329 if any of the following situations exists. •Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is correctly shown in box 7 of all your Forms 1099-R. If you don't owe any other addi- tional tax on a distribution, multiply the tax- able part of the early distribution by 10% (0.10) and enter the result on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 8. Enter “No” to the left of the line to indicate that you don't have to file Form 5329. However, if you owe this tax and also owe any other additional tax on a distribution, don't enter this 10% additional tax directly on your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Y ou must file Form 5329 to report your ad- ditional taxes. •If you rolled over part or all of a distribution from a qualified retirement plan, the part rolled over isn't subject to the tax on early distributions. •If you have a qualified disaster distribution. Roth IRAs Regardless of your age, you may be able to es- tablish and make nondeductible contributions to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA. Contributions not reported. Y ou don't report Roth IRA contributions on your return. What Is a Roth IRA? A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that, except as explained in this chapter, is subject to the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined earlier). It can be either an account or an annu- ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities are described under How Can a T raditional IRA Be Opened? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. T o be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is opened. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA. Be- ginning in tax year 2023, both a SEP or SIMPLE IRA can be designated as a Roth IRA. Unlike a traditional IRA, you can't deduct contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy the requirements, qualified distributions (dis- cussed later) are tax free. Y ou can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as long as you live. When Can a Roth IRA Be Opened? Y ou can open a Roth IRA at any time. However, the time for making contributions for any year is limited. See When Can Y ou Make Contributions under Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth IRA? next.Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if you have taxable compensation (defined later) and your modified AGI (defined later) is less than: •$240,000 for married filing jointly or qualify- ing surviving spouse; •$161,000 for single, head of household, or married filing separately and you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year; or •$10,000 for married filing separately and you lived with your spouse at any time dur- ing the year. Y ou may be eligible to claim a credit for contributions to your Roth IRA. For more information, see chapter 3 of Pub. 590-A. Is there an age limit for contributions? Con- tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard- less of your age. Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for your spouse? Y ou can contribute to a Roth IRA for your spouse provided the contributions satisfy the Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit (dis- cussed under How Much Can Be Contributed , earlier, under T raditional IRAs ), you file jointly, and your modified AGI is less than $240,000. Compensation. Compensation includes wa- ges, salaries, tips, professional fees, bonuses, and other amounts received for providing per- sonal services. It also includes commissions, self- employment income, nontaxable combat pay, military differential pay, taxable alimony and separate maintenance payments, and taxable non-tuition fellowship and stipend payments. See What is compensation , earlier, for more information. Modified AGI. Y our modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is your AGI as shown on your return with some adjustments. Use Worksheet 9 -2 to determine your modified AGI. TIPPage 91 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 89 --- Page 92 --- Worksheet 9-2. Modified AGI for Roth IRA Purposes Keep for Y our Records Use this worksheet to figure your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. 1. Enter your AGI from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 11 ............................... 1. 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA (included on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b) and a rollover from a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA (included on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 5b) ...................... 2. 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 .................................................... 3. 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 20 .............. 4. 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 21 ......... 5. 6. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form 2555, line 45 ...... 6. 7. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ........................ 7. 8. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 .................. 8. 9. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form 8839, line 28 ........ 9. 10. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 9 .......................................... 10. 11. Enter: •$240,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying surviving spouse, •$10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your spouse at any time during the year, or •$161,000 for all others .................................................... 11. Is the amount on line 10 more than the amount on line 11? If yes, then see the Note below. If no, then the amount on line 10 is your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. Note. If the amount on line 10 is more than the amount on line 11 and you have other income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that are subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. (If you receive social security benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Pub. 590-A to refigure your AGI.) Then, go to line 3 above in this Worksheet 9-2 to refigure your modified AGI. If you don't have other income or loss items subject to AGI-based phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 10. How Much Can Be Contributed? The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generally depends on whether contributions are made only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and Roth IRAs. Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit is generally the lesser of the following amounts. •$7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older in 2024), or •Y our taxable compensation. However, if your modified AGI is above a certain amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, as explained later under Contribution limit re- duced .Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs. If contribu- tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu- tion limit for Roth IRAs is generally the same as your limit would be if contributions were made only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all con- tributions for the year to all IRAs other than Roth IRAs. Employer contributions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan don't affect this limit. This means that your contribution limit is generally the lesser of the following amounts. •$7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older in 2024) minus all contributions (other than employer contributions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs other than Roth IRAs.•Y our taxable compensation minus all con- tributions (other than employer contribu- tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs other than Roth IRAs. However, if your modified AGI is above a certain amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, as explained next under Contribution limit re- duced . Contribution limit reduced. If your modified AGI is above a certain amount, your contribu- tion limit is gradually reduced. Use T able 9 -3 to determine if this reduction applies to you.Page 92 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 90 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 93 --- T able 9-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of your modified AGI . IF you have taxable compensation and your filing status is...AND your modified AGI is... THEN... Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouseless than $230,000 you can contribute up to $7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older in 2024). at least $230,000 but less than $240,000the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A. $240,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA. Married filing separately and you lived with your spouse at any time during the yearzero (-0-) you can contribute up to $7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older in 2024). more than zero (-0-) but less than $10,000the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A. $10,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA. Single, Head of household, or Married filing separately and you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the yearless than $146,000 you can contribute up to $7,000 ($8,000 if you are 50 or older in 2024). at least $146,000 but less than $161,000the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A. $161,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA. Figuring the reduction. If the amount you can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see Worksheet 2 -2 under Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth IRA? in chapter 2 of Pub. 590 -A for how to figure the reduction. When Can You Make Contributions? Y ou can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a year at any time during the year or by the due date of your return for that year (not including extensions). Y ou can make contributions for 2024 by the due date (not including extensions) for filing your 2024 tax return. What if You Contribute Too Much? A 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu- tion to a Roth IRA. Excess contributions. These are the contri- butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal the total of: 1.Amounts contributed for the tax year to your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop- erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA or properly converted from a traditional IRA or rolled over from a qualified retire- ment plan , as described later) that are more than your contribution limit for the year; plus 2.Any excess contributions for the preceding year, reduced by the total of: a.Any distributions out of your Roth IRAs for the year, plus b.Y our contribution limit for the year mi- nus your contributions to all your IRAs for the year. TIPWithdrawal of excess contributions. For purposes of determining excess contributions, any contribution that is withdrawn on or before the due date (including extensions) for filing your tax return for the year is treated as an amount not contributed. This treatment applies only if any earnings on the contributions are also withdrawn. The earnings are considered to have been earned and received in the year the excess contribution was made. Applying excess contributions. If contribu- tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than the limit, you can apply the excess contribution in one year to a later year if the contributions for that later year are less than the maximum al- lowed for that year. Can You Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA? Y ou may be able to convert amounts from either a traditional, SEP , or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth IRA. Y ou may be able to roll amounts over from a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. Y ou may be able to recharacterize contributions made to one IRA as having been made directly to a different IRA. Y ou can roll amounts over from a designated Roth account or from one Roth IRA to another Roth IRA. Conversions Y ou can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard- less of the conversion method used. Most of the rules for rollovers, described earlier under Roll- over From One IRA Into Another under T radi- tional IRAs , apply to these rollovers. However, the 1-year waiting period doesn't apply.Conversion methods. Y ou can convert amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in any of the following ways. •Rollover . Y ou can receive a distribution from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con- tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 days after the distribution. •Trustee-to-trustee transfer . Y ou can di- rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to transfer an amount from the traditional IRA to the trustee of the Roth IRA. •Same trustee transfer . If the trustee of the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer an amount from the traditional IRA to the Roth IRA. Same trustee. Conversions made with the same trustee can be made by redesignating the traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open- ing a new account or issuing a new contract. Rollover from a qualified retirement plan into a Roth IRA. Y ou can roll over into a Roth IRA all or part of an eligible rollover distribution you receive from your (or your deceased spou- se's): •Employer's qualified pension, profit-shar- ing, or stock bonus plan; •Annuity plan; •T ax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) plan); or •Governmental deferred compensation plan (section 457 plan). Any amount rolled over is subject to the same rules as those for converting a traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. Also, the rollover contribution must meet the rollover requirements that apply to the specific type of retirement plan.Page 93 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 91 --- Page 94 --- Income. Y ou must include in your gross in- come distributions from a qualified retirement plan that you would have had to include in in- come if you hadn't rolled them over into a Roth IRA. Y ou don't include in gross income any part of a distribution from a qualified retirement plan that is a return of basis (after -tax contributions) to the plan that was taxable to you when paid. These amounts are normally included in income on your return for the year of the rollover from the qualified employer plan to a Roth IRA. If you must include any amount in your gross income, you may have to in- crease your withholding or make esti- mated tax payments. See Pub. 505, T ax With- holding and Estimated T ax. For more information, see Rollover From Employer's Plan Into a Roth IRA in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A. Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally, you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA to a Roth IRA under the same rules explained earlier under Converting From Any T raditional IRA to a Roth IRA under T raditional IRAs . However, you can't convert any amount dis- tributed from the SIMPLE IRA plan during the 2-year period beginning on the date you first participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan main- tained by your employer. More information. For more detailed informa- tion on conversions, see Can Y ou Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA? in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A. Rollover From a Roth IRA Y ou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the as- sets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Roll- over From One IRA Into Another under T radi- tional IRAs , apply to these rollovers. Rollover from designated Roth account. A rollover from a designated Roth account can CAUTION!only be made to another designated Roth ac- count or to a Roth IRA. For more information about designated Roth accounts, see Designa- ted Roth accounts under Rollovers in Pub. 575. Are Distributions Taxable? Y ou don't include in your gross income qualified distributions or distributions that are a return of your regular contributions from your Roth IRA(s). Y ou also don't include distributions from your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into an- other Roth IRA. Y ou may have to include part of other distributions in your income. See Ordering rules for distributions , later. What are qualified distributions? A qualified distribution is any payment or distribution from your Roth IRA that meets the following require- ments. 1.It is made after the 5-year period begin- ning with the first tax year for which a con- tribution was made to a Roth IRA set up for your benefit. 2.The payment or distribution is: a.Made on or after the date you reach age 591/2, b.Made because you are disabled, c.Made to a beneficiary or to your es- tate after your death, or d.T o pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of certain qualified first-time homebuyer amounts. See First home under What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B for more information. Additional tax on distributions of conver- sion and certain rollover contributions within 5 -year period. If, within the 5 -year pe- riod starting with the first day of your tax year in which you convert an amount from a traditional IRA or roll over an amount from a qualified re- tirement plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distribu-tion from a Roth IRA, you may have to pay the 10% additional tax on early distributions. Y ou must generally pay the 10% additional tax on any amount attributable to the part of the amount converted or rolled over (the conversion or rollover contribution) that you had to include in income. A separate 5 -year period applies to each conversion and rollover. See Ordering rules for distributions , later, to determine the amount, if any, of the distribution that is attribut- able to the part of the conversion or rollover contribution that you had to include in income. Additional tax on other early distributions. Unless an exception applies, you must pay the 10% additional tax on the taxable part of any distributions that aren't qualified distributions. See Pub. 590-B for more information. Ordering rules for distributions. If you re- ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that isn't a qualified distribution, part of it may be taxable. There is a set order in which contributions (in- cluding conversion contributions and rollover contributions from qualified retirement plans) and earnings are considered to be distributed from your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are distributed first. See Ordering Rules for Distribu- tions under Are Distributions T axable? in chap- ter 2 of Pub. 590-B for more information. Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets? Y ou aren't required to take distributions from your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri- bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs don't apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner, certain minimum distribution rules that apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs. More information. For more detailed informa- tion on Roth IRAs, see chapter 2 of Pub. 590 -A and Pub. 590-B.Page 94 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 92 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 95 --- Part Three. Standard Deduction, Itemized Deductions, and Other DeductionsAfter you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtract the deductions used to figure taxable income. Y ou can subtract either the standard deduction or itemized deductions, and, if you qualify, the qualified business income deduction. Itemized deductions are deductions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The three chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction and certain itemized deductions. See chapter 10 for the factors to consider when deciding whether to take the standard deduction or itemized deductions. The Form 1040 and 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these chapters are: •Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income; •Schedule 2, Part II, Other T axes; and •Schedule 3, Part I, Nonrefundable Credits. 10. Standard Deduction What's New Standard deduction increased. The stand- ard deduction for taxpayers who don't itemize their deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) has increased. The amount of your standard deduction depends on your filing status and other factors. Use the 2024 Standard Deduction T ables near the end of this chapter to figure your standard deduction. Introduction This chapter discusses the following topics. •How to figure the amount of your standard deduction. •The standard deduction for dependents. •Who should itemize deductions. Most taxpayers have a choice of either tak- ing a standard deduction or itemizing their de- ductions. If you have a choice, you can use the method that gives you the lower tax. The standard deduction is a dollar amount that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex- penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc- tion is higher for taxpayers who: •Are 65 or older, or •Are blind.Y ou benefit from the standard deduc- tion if your standard deduction is more than the total of your allowable itemized deductions. Persons not eligible for the standard de- duction. Y our standard deduction is zero and you should itemize any deductions you have if: •Y our filing status is married filing sepa- rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc- tions on their return; •Y ou are filing a tax return for a short tax year because of a change in your annual accounting period; or •Y ou are a nonresident or dual-status alien during the year. Y ou are considered a dual-status alien if you were both a nonres- ident and resident alien during the year. If you are a nonresident alien who is married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the year, you can choose to be treated as a U.S. resident. (See Pub. 519.) If you make this choice, you can take the standard deduction. If you can be claimed as a dependent on another person’s return (such as your parents’ return), your standard de- duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc- tion for Dependents , later. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information 502 Medical and Dental Expenses 526 Charitable Contributions 530 T ax Information for Homeowners 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts 550 Investment Income and Expenses 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction TIP CAUTION! 501 502 526 530 547 550 936970 T ax Benefits for Education Form (and Instructions) Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions Standard Deduction Amount The standard deduction amount depends on your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or blind, and whether another taxpayer can claim you as a dependent. Generally, the standard deduction amounts are adjusted each year for inflation. The standard deduction amounts for most people are shown in T able 10 -1. Decedent's final return. The standard deduc- tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same as it would have been had the decedent contin- ued to live. However, if the decedent wasn't 65 or older at the time of death, the higher stand- ard deduction for age can't be claimed. Higher Standard Deduction for Age (65 or Older) If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the year and don't itemize deductions, you are enti- tled to a higher standard deduction. Y ou are considered 65 on the day before your 65th birth- day. Therefore, you can take a higher standard deduction for 2024 if you were born before Jan- uary 2, 1960. Use T able 10 -2 to figure the standard de- duction amount. Death of a taxpayer. If you are preparing a re- turn for someone who died in 2024, read this before using T able 10 -2 or T able 10 -3. Consider the taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 2024 only if they were 65 or older at the time of death. Even if the taxpayer was born before January 2, 1960, they are not considered 65 or older at the 970 Schedule A (Form 1040) Page 95 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 10 Standard Deduction 93 --- Page 96 --- end of 2024 unless they were 65 or older at the time of death. A person is considered to reach age 65 on the day before their 65th birthday. Higher Standard Deduction for Blindness If you are blind on the last day of the year and you don't itemize deductions, you are entitled to a higher standard deduction. Not totally blind. If you aren't totally blind, you must get a certified statement from an eye doc- tor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) that: •Y ou can't see better than 20/200 in the bet- ter eye with glasses or contact lenses, or •Y our field of vision is 20 degrees or less. If your eye condition isn't likely to improve beyond these limits, the statement should in- clude this fact. Keep the statement in your re- cords. If your vision can be corrected beyond these limits only by contact lenses that you can wear only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, you can take the higher standard deduction for blindness if you otherwise qualify. Spouse 65 or Older or Blind Y ou can take the higher standard deduction if your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and: •Y ou file a joint return, or •Y ou file a separate return and your spouse had no gross income and can't be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer. Death of a spouse. If your spouse died in 2024 before reaching age 65, you can't take a higher standard deduction because of your spouse. Even if your spouse was born before January 2, 1960, your spouse isn't considered 65 or older at the end of 2024 unless your spouse was 65 or older at the time of death. A person is considered to reach age 65 on the day before their 65th birthday. Example. Y our spouse was born on Febru- ary 14, 1959, and died on February 13, 2024. Y our spouse is considered age 65 at the time of death. However, if your spouse died on Febru- ary 12, 2024, your spouse isn't considered age 65 at the time of death and isn't 65 or older at the end of 2024. Y ou can't claim the higher standard de- duction for an individual other than yourself and your spouse. Higher Standard Deduction for Net Disaster Loss Y our standard deduction may be increased by any net qualified disaster loss. See the Instructions for Form 1040 and the Instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040) for more information on how to figure your CAUTION!increased standard deduction and how to report it on Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Examples The following examples illustrate how to deter- mine your standard deduction using T ables 10-1 and 10 -2. Example 1. A married couple, 46 and 33 years old, are filing a joint return for 2024. Nei- ther is blind, and neither can be claimed as a dependent. They decide not to itemize their de- ductions. They use T able 10 -1. Their standard deduction is $29,200. Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except that one of the spouses is blind at the end of 2024. They use T able 10 -2. Their standard deduction is $30,750. Example 3. A married couple is filing a joint return for 2024. Both are over age 65. Neither is blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend- ent. If they don't itemize deductions, they use T able 10 -2. Their standard deduction is $32,300. Standard Deduction for Dependents The standard deduction for an individual who can be claimed as a dependent on another per- son's tax return is generally limited to the greater of: •$1,300, or •The individual's earned income for the year plus $450 (but not more than the regular standard deduction amount, generally $14,600). However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, the standard deduction may be higher. If you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) can be claimed as a dependent on someone else's re- turn, use T able 10 -3 to determine your standard deduction. Earned income defined. Earned income is salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and other amounts received as pay for work you ac- tually perform. For purposes of the standard deduction, earned income also includes any part of a taxa- ble scholarship or fellowship grant. See chap- ter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information on what qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship grant. Example 1. Y ou are 16 years old and sin- gle. Y our parents can claim you as a dependent on their 2024 tax return. Y ou have interest in- come of $780 and wages of $150. Y ou have no itemized deductions and use T able 10 -3 to find your standard deduction. Y ou enter $150 (earned income) on line 1, $600 ($150 + $450) on line 3, $1,300 (the larger of $600 and $1,300) on line 5, and $14,600 on line 6. Y our standard deduction, on line 7a, is $1,300 (the smaller of $1,300 and $14,600). Example 2. Y ou are a 22 -year- old college student and can be claimed as a dependent on your parents' 2024 tax return. Y ou are married filing a separate return. Y our spouse doesn't itemize deductions. Y ou have $1,500 in interest income and wages of $3,800 and no itemized deductions. Y ou find your standard deduction by using T able 10 -3. Y ou enter earned income, $3,800, on line 1. Y ou add lines 1 and 2 and en- ter $4,250 ($3,800 + $450) on line 3. On line 5, you enter $4,250, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because you are married filing a separate re- turn, you enter $14,600 on line 6. On line 7a, you enter $4,250 as the standard deduction amount because it is smaller than $14,600, the amount on line 6. Example 3. Y ou are single and can be claimed as a dependent on your parents' 2024 tax return. Y ou are 18 years old and blind and have interest income of $1,300, wages of $2,900, and no itemized deductions. Y ou use T able 10 -3 to find the standard deduction amount. Y ou enter wages of $2,900 on line 1, and add lines 1 and 2 and enter $3,350 ($2,900 + $450) on line 3. On line 5, you enter $3,350, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because you are sin- gle, you enter $14,600 on line 6 and $3,350 on line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 and 6. Because you checked one box in the top part of the worksheet, you enter $1,950 on line 7b, then add the amounts on lines 7a and 7b and enter the standard deduction amount of $5,300 ($3,350 + $1,950) on line 7c. Example 4. Y ou are 18 years old and single and can be claimed as a dependent on your pa- rents’ 2024 tax return. Y ou have wages of $7,000, interest income of $500, a business loss of $3,000, and no itemized deductions. Y ou use T able 10 -3 to figure the standard deduction amount. Y ou enter $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000) on line 1, and add lines 1 and 2 and enter $4,450 ($4,000 + $450) on line 3. On line 5, you enter $4,450, the larger of lines 3 and 4, and, be- cause you are single, $14,600 on line 6. On line 7a, you enter $4,450 as the standard de- duction amount because it is smaller than $14,600, the amount on line 6. Who Should Itemize Y ou should itemize deductions if your total de- ductions are more than your standard deduction amount. Also, you should itemize if you don't qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed earlier under Persons not eligible for the stand- ard deduction . Y ou should first figure your itemized deduc- tions and compare that amount to your standard deduction to make sure you are using the method that gives you the greater benefit. When to itemize. Y ou may benefit from itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you: •Don't qualify for the standard deduction, •Had large uninsured medical and dental expenses during the year, •Paid interest and taxes on your home, •Had large uninsured casualty or theft los- ses, •Made large contributions to qualified chari- ties, orPage 96 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 94 Chapter 10 Standard Deduction Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 97 --- •Have total itemized deductions that are more than the standard deduction to which you are otherwise entitled. These deductions are explained in chapter 11 and in the publications listed under Useful Items , earlier. If you decide to itemize your deductions, complete Schedule A (Form 1040) and attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter the amount from Schedule A (Form 1040), line 17, on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 12. Electing to itemize for state tax or other purposes. Even if your itemized deductions are less than your standard deduction, you can elect to itemize deductions on your federal re-turn rather than taking the standard deduction. Y ou may want to do this if, for example, the tax benefit of itemizing your deductions on your state tax return is greater than the tax benefit you lose on your federal return by not taking the standard deduction. T o make this election, you must check the box on line 18 of Schedule A (Form 1040). Changing your mind. If you don't itemize your deductions and later find that you should have itemized— or if you itemize your deductions and later find you shouldn't have —you can change your return by filing Form 1040 -X, Amended U.S. Individual Income T ax Return. See Amen- ded Returns and Claims for Refund in chapter 1 for more information on amended returns.Married persons who filed separate re- turns. Y ou can change methods of taking de- ductions only if you and your spouse both make the same changes. Both of you must file a con- sent to assessment for any additional tax either one may owe as a result of the change. Y ou and your spouse can use the method that gives you the lower total tax, even though one of you may pay more tax than you would have paid by using the other method. Y ou both must use the same method of claiming deduc- tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other should itemize because they won't qualify for the standard deduction. See Persons not eligi- ble for the standard deduction , earlier.Page 97 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 10 Standard Deduction 95 --- Page 98 --- 2024 Standard Deduction Tables CAUTION! If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you can't take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1960, or are blind. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* Table 10-1. IF your filing status is... THEN your standard deduction is... Single or Married filing separately $14,600 Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse 29,200 Head of household 21,900 * Don't use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1960, are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent. Use T able 10-2 or 10-3 instead. Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1960, or Who Are Blind* Table 10-2. Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. You: Born before January 2, 1960 Blind Your spouse : Born before January 2, 1960 Blind Total number of boxes checked IF your filing status is...AND the number in the box above is...THEN your standard deduction is... Single 1 $16,550 2 18,500 Married filing jointly 1 $30,750 2 32,300 3 33,850 4 35,400 Qualifying surviving spouse 1 $30,750 2 32,300 Married filing 1 $16,150 separately** 2 17,700 3 19,250 4 20,800 Head of household 1 $23,850 2 25,800 * If someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent, use T able 10-3 instead. ** Y ou can check the boxes for Y our Spouse if your filing status is married filing separately and your spouse had no income, isn’t filing a return, and can’t be claimed as a dependent on another person’s return. Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent.Table 10-3. Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet. You: Born before January 2, 1960 Blind Your spouse : Born before January 2, 1960 Blind Total number of boxes checked 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter -0-. 1. 2. Additional amount. 2. $450 3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3. 4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $1,300 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. •Single or Married filing separately—$14,600 •Married filing jointly—$29,200 •Head of household—$21,9006. 7. Standard deduction. a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1960, and not blind, stop here. This is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a. b. If born before January 2, 1960, or blind, multiply $1,950 ($1,550 if married) by the number in the box above. 7b. c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2024. 7c. Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also includes any taxable scholarship or fellowship grant.Page 98 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 96 Chapter 10 Standard Deduction Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 99 --- 11. Taxes Reminders Limitation on deduction for state and local taxes. The T ax Cuts and Jobs Act provided for a temporary limitation on the deduction for state and local taxes. See Limitation on deduction for state and local taxes , later. No deduction for foreign taxes paid for real estate. Y ou can no longer deduct foreign taxes you paid on real estate. Introduction This chapter discusses which taxes you can de- duct if you itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). It also explains which taxes you can deduct on other schedules or forms and which taxes you can’t deduct. This chapter covers the following topics. •Income taxes (federal, state, local, and for- eign). •General sales taxes (state and local). •Real estate taxes (state, local, and for- eign). •Personal property taxes (state and local). •T axes and fees you can’t deduct. Use T able 11 -1 as a guide to determine which taxes you can deduct. The end of the chapter contains a section that explains which forms you use to deduct dif- ferent types of taxes. Business taxes. Y ou can deduct certain taxes only if they are ordinary and necessary expen- ses of your trade or business or of producing in- come. For information on these taxes, see Busi- ness Expenses in Chapter 8 of Pub. 334. State or local taxes. These are taxes imposed by the 50 states, U.S. territories, or any of their political subdivisions (such as a county or city), or by the District of Columbia. Indian tribal government. An Indian tribal government recognized by the Secretary of the T reasury as performing substantial government functions will be treated as a state for purposes of claiming a deduction for taxes. Income taxes, real estate taxes, and personal property taxes imposed by that Indian tribal government (or by any of its subdivisions that are treated as politi- cal subdivisions of a state) are deductible. General sales taxes. These are taxes im- posed at one rate on retail sales of a broad range of classes of items. Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by a foreign country or any of its political subdivi- sions.Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 502 Medical and Dental Expenses 503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals 514 Foreign T ax Credit for Individuals 525 T axable and Nontaxable Income 530 T ax Information for Homeowners Form (and Instructions) Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business (Sole Proprietorship) Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental Income and Loss Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Farming Schedule SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment T ax 1116 Foreign T ax Credit For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Tests To Deduct Any Tax The following two tests must be met for you to deduct any tax. •The tax must be imposed on you. •Y ou must pay the tax during your tax year. The tax must be imposed on you. In gen- eral, you can deduct only taxes imposed on you. Generally, you can deduct property taxes only if you are an owner of the property. If your spouse owns the property and pays the real es- tate taxes, the taxes are deductible on your spouse's separate return or on your joint return. You must pay the tax during your tax year. If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct only those taxes you actually paid during your tax year. If you pay your taxes by check and the check is honored by your financial institution, the day you mail or deliver the check is the date of payment. If you use a pay -by-phone account (such as a credit card or electronic funds with- drawal), the date reported on the statement of the financial institution showing when payment was made is the date of payment. If you contest a tax liability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct the tax only in the year you actually pay it (or transfer money or other property to provide for satisfaction of the contested liabil- ity). See Pub. 538 for details. If you use an accrual method of accounting, see Pub. 538 for more information. Income Taxes This section discusses the deductibility of state and local income taxes (including employee 502 503 504 514 525 530 Schedule A (Form 1040) Schedule C (Form 1040) Schedule E (Form 1040) Schedule F (Form 1040) Schedule SE (Form 1040) 1116 contributions to state benefit funds) and foreign income taxes. State and Local Income Taxes Y ou can deduct state and local income taxes. Exception. Y ou can’t deduct state and local in- come taxes you pay on income that is exempt from federal income tax, unless the exempt in- come is interest income. For example, you can’t deduct the part of a state's income tax that is on a cost -of-living allowance exempt from federal income tax. What To Deduct Y our deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti- mated tax payments, or other tax payments as follows. Withheld taxes. Y ou can deduct state and lo- cal income taxes withheld from your salary in the year they are withheld. Y our Form(s) W -2 will show these amounts. Forms W -2G, 1099-B, 1099- DIV , 1099 -G, 1099 -K, 1099 -MISC, 1099- NEC, 1099 -OID, and 1099 -R may also show state and local income taxes withheld. Estimated tax payments. Y ou can deduct es- timated tax payments you made during the year to a state or local government. However, you must have a reasonable basis for making the estimated tax payments. Any estimated state or local tax payments that aren’t made in good faith at the time of payment aren’t deductible. Example. Y ou made an estimated state in- come tax payment. However, the estimate of your state tax liability shows that you will get a refund of the full amount of your estimated pay- ment. Y ou had no reasonable basis to believe you had any additional liability for state income taxes and you can’t deduct the estimated tax payment. Refund applied to taxes. Y ou can deduct any part of a refund of prior -year state or local in- come taxes that you chose to have credited to your 2024 estimated state or local income taxes. Don’t reduce your deduction by either of the following items. •Any state or local income tax refund (or credit) you expect to receive for 2024. •Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year state and local income taxes you actually re- ceived in 2024. However, part or all of this refund (or credit) may be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state or local income taxes , later. Separate federal returns. If you and your spouse file separate state, local, and federal in- come tax returns, each of you can deduct on your federal return only the amount of your own state and local income tax that you paid during the tax year. Joint state and local returns. If you and your spouse file joint state and local returns and separate federal returns, each of you can de- duct on your separate federal return a part of the state and local income taxes paid during the Page 99 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 11 Taxes 97 --- Page 100 --- tax year. Y ou can deduct only the amount of the total taxes that is proportionate to your gross in- come compared to the combined gross income of you and your spouse. However, you can’t de- duct more than the amount you actually paid during the year. Y ou can avoid this calculation if you and your spouse are jointly and individually liable for the full amount of the state and local income taxes. If so, you and your spouse can deduct on your separate federal returns the amount you each actually paid. Joint federal return. If you file a joint federal return, you can deduct the state and local in- come taxes both of you paid. Contributions to state benefit funds. As an employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu- tions to state benefit funds withheld from your wages that provide protection against loss of wages. For example, certain states require em- ployees to make contributions to state funds providing disability or unemployment insurance benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol- lowing state benefit funds are deductible as state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a. •Alaska Unemployment Compensation Fund. •California Nonoccupational Disability Ben- efit Fund. •New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability Benefit Fund. •New Jersey Unemployment Compensation Fund. •New Y ork Nonoccupational Disability Ben- efit Fund. •Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa- tion Fund. •Rhode Island T emporary Disability Benefit Fund. •Washington State Supplemental Work- men's Compensation Fund. Employee contributions to private or voluntary disability plans aren’t deduc- tible. Refund (or credit) of state or local income taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for) state or local income taxes in a year after the year in which you paid them, you may have to include the refund in income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, in the year you receive it. This includes refunds resulting from taxes that were overwithheld, applied from a prior -year re- turn, not figured correctly, or figured again be- cause of an amended return. If you didn’t item- ize your deductions in the previous year, don’t include the refund in income. If you deducted the taxes in the previous year, include all or part of the refund on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, in the year you receive the refund. For a discus- sion of how much to include, see Recoveries in Pub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income, for more information. Foreign Income Taxes Generally, you can take either a deduction or a credit for income taxes imposed on you by a for- eign country or a U.S. territory. However, you CAUTION!can’t take a deduction or credit for foreign in- come taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. tax under the foreign earned income exclu- sion or the foreign housing exclusion. For infor- mation on these exclusions, see Pub. 54, T ax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign tax credit, see Pub. 514. State and Local General Sales Taxes Y ou can elect to deduct state and local general sales taxes, instead of state and local income taxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a. Y ou can use either your actual expenses or the state and local sales tax tables to figure your sales tax deduction. Actual expenses. Generally, you can deduct the actual state and local general sales taxes (including compensating use taxes) if the tax rate was the same as the general sales tax rate. Food, clothing, and medical supplies. Sales taxes on food, clothing, and medical sup- plies are deductible as a general sales tax even if the tax rate was less than the general sales tax rate. Motor vehicles. Sales taxes on motor vehi- cles are deductible as a general sales tax even if the tax rate was less than the general sales tax rate. However, if you paid sales tax on a mo- tor vehicle at a rate higher than the general sales tax, you can deduct only the amount of the tax that you would have paid at the general sales tax rate on that vehicle. Include any state and local general sales taxes paid for a leased motor vehicle. For purposes of this section, mo- tor vehicles include cars, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, sport utility vehi- cles, trucks, vans, and off-road vehicles. If you use the actual expenses method, you must have receipts to show the general sales taxes paid. Trade or business items. Don't include sales taxes paid on items used in your trade or business on Schedule A (Form 1040). Instead, go to the instructions for the form you are using to report business income and expenses to see if you can deduct these taxes. Optional sales tax tables. Instead of using your actual expenses, you can figure your state and local general sales tax deduction using the state and local sales tax tables in the Instruc- tions for Schedule A (Form 1040). Y ou may also be able to add the state and local general sales taxes paid on certain specified items. Y our applicable table amount is based on the state where you live, your income, and your family size. Y our income is your adjusted gross income plus any nontaxable items such as the following. •T ax-exempt interest. •Veterans’ benefits. •Nontaxable combat pay. •Workers’ compensation. •Nontaxable part of social security and rail- road retirement benefits. CAUTION!•Nontaxable part of IRA, pension, or annuity distributions, excluding rollovers. •Public assistance payments. If you lived in different states during the same tax year, you must prorate your applicable table amount for each state based on the days you lived in each state. See the instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a, for details. State and Local Real Estate Taxes Deductible real estate taxes are any state and local taxes on real property levied for the gen- eral public welfare. Y ou can deduct these taxes only if they are assessed uniformly against all property under the jurisdiction of the taxing au- thority. The proceeds must be for general com- munity or governmental purposes and not be a payment for a special privilege granted or serv- ice rendered to you. Deductible real estate taxes generally don’t include taxes charged for local benefits and im- provements that increase the value of the prop- erty. They also don’t include itemized charges for services (such as trash collection) assessed against specific property or certain people, even if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For more information about taxes and charges that aren’t deductible, see Real Estate -Related Items Y ou Can’t Deduct , later. Tenant- shareholders in a cooperative hous- ing corporation. Generally, if you are a ten- ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo- ration, you can deduct the amount paid to the corporation that represents your share of the real estate taxes the corporation paid or incur- red for your dwelling unit. The corporation should provide you with a statement showing your share of the taxes. For more information, see Special Rules for Cooperatives in Pub. 530. Division of real estate taxes between buy- ers and sellers. If you bought or sold real es- tate during the year, the real estate taxes must be divided between the buyer and the seller. The buyer and the seller must divide the real estate taxes according to the number of days in the real property tax year (the period to which the tax is imposed relates) that each owned the property. The seller is treated as paying the taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin- ning with the date of sale. This applies regard- less of the lien dates under local law. Generally, this information is included on the settlement statement provided at the closing. If you (the seller) can’t deduct taxes until they are paid because you use the cash method of accounting, and the buyer of your property is personally liable for the tax, you are considered to have paid your part of the tax at the time of the sale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax to the date of sale even though you didn’t ac- tually pay it. However, you must also include the amount of that tax in the selling price of the property. The buyer must include the same amount in the cost of the property. Y ou figure your deduction for taxes on each property bought or sold during the real property tax year as follows.Page 100 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 98 Chapter 11 Taxes Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 101 --- Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your State and Local Real Estate Tax Deduction Keep for Y our Records 1. Enter the total state and local real estate taxes for the real property tax year .................... 2. Enter the number of days in the real property tax year that you owned the property ................. 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, divide line 2 by 366) ............ 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b .............. Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you bought or sold during the real property tax year. Y our total deduction is the sum of the line 4 amounts for all of the properties. Real estate taxes for prior years. Don’t di- vide delinquent taxes between the buyer and seller if the taxes are for any real property tax year before the one in which the property is sold. Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delin- quent taxes, the buyer can’t deduct them. The buyer must add them to the cost of the property. The seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer. However, the seller must include them in the selling price. Examples. The following examples illustrate how real estate taxes are divided between buyer and seller. Example 1. Porter and Riley White's real property tax year for both their old home and their new home is the calendar year, with pay- ment due August 1. The tax on their old home, sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their new home, bought on May 3, was $732. Porter and Riley are considered to have paid a proportion- ate share of the real estate taxes on the old home even though they didn’t actually pay them to the taxing authority. On the other hand, they can claim only a proportionate share of the taxes they paid on their new property even though they paid the entire amount. Porter and Riley owned their old home dur- ing the real property tax year for 127 days (Jan- uary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). They figure their deduction for taxes on their old home as follows. Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your State and Local Real Estate Tax Deduction — Taxes on Old Home 1. Enter the total state and local real estate taxes for the real property tax year ...$620 2. Enter the number of days in the real property tax year that you owned the property ................127 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, divide line 2 by 366) ..........0.3470 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b .............$215 Since the buyers of their old home paid all of the taxes, Porter and Riley also include the $215 in the selling price of the old home. (The buyers add the $215 to their cost of the home.) Porter and Riley owned their new home dur- ing the real property tax year for 243 days (May 3 to December 31, including their date of pur- chase). They figure their deduction for taxes on their new home as follows. Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your State and Local Real Estate Tax Deduction — Taxes on New Home 1. Enter the total state and local real estate taxes for the real property tax year ...$732 2. Enter the number of days in the real property tax year that you owned the property ................243 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, divide line 2 by 366) ..........0.6639 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b .............$486 Since Porter and Riley paid all of the taxes on the new home, they add $246 ($732 paid less $486 deduction) to their cost of the new home. (The sellers add this $246 to their selling price and deduct the $246 as a real estate tax.) Porter and Riley's real estate tax deduction for their old and new homes is the sum of $215 and $486, or $701. They will enter this amount on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b. Example 2. Reese and Quin Brown bought a new home on May 3, 2024. Their real property tax year for the new home is the calendar year. Real estate taxes for 2023 were assessed in their state on January 1, 2024. The taxes be- came due on May 31, 2024, and October 31, 2024. The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2023 were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2024, and $340 on October 31, 2024. These taxes were for the 2023 real property tax year. The Browns can’t deduct them since they didn’t own the property until 2024. Instead, they must add $680 to the cost of their new home. In January 2025, the Browns receive their 2024 property tax statement for $752, which they will pay in 2025. The Browns owned their new home during the 2024 real property tax year for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They will figure their 2025 deduction for taxes as follows. Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your State and Local Real Estate Tax Deduction — Taxes on New Home 1. Enter the total state and local real estate taxes for the real property tax year ...$752 2. Enter the number of days in the real property tax year that you owned the property ................243 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, divide line 2 by 366) ..........0.6639 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your deduction. Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b ..........$499 The remaining $253 ($752 paid less $499 de- duction) of taxes paid in 2025, along with the $680 paid in 2024, is added to the cost of their new home. Because the taxes up to the date of sale are considered paid by the seller on the date of sale, the seller is entitled to a 2024 tax deduc- tion of $933. This is the sum of the $680 for 2023 and the $253 for the 123 days the seller owned the home in 2024. The seller must also include the $933 in the selling price when they figure the gain or loss on the sale. The seller should contact the Browns in January 2025 to find out how much real estate tax is due for 2024. Form 1099 -S. For certain sales or ex- changes of real estate, the person responsible for closing the sale (generally, the settlement agent) prepares Form 1099 -S, Proceeds From Real Estate T ransactions, to report certain infor- mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- erty. Box 2 of Form 1099 -S is for the gross pro- ceeds from the sale and should include the portion of the seller's real estate tax liability that the buyer will pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes these taxes in the cost basis of the property, and the seller both deducts this amount as a tax paid and includes it in the sales price of the property. For a real estate transaction that involves a home, any real estate tax the seller paid in ad- vance but that is the liability of the buyer ap- pears in box 6 of Form 1099 -S. The buyer de- ducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the seller reduces their real estate tax deduction (or includes it in income) by the same amount. See Refund (or rebate) , later. Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly mort- gage payment includes an amount placed in es- crow (put in the care of a third party) for real es- tate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the total amount placed in escrow. Y ou can deduct only the real estate tax that the third party ac- tually paid to the taxing authority. If the third party doesn’t notify you of the amount of real estate tax that was paid for you, contact the third party or the taxing authority to find the proper amount to show on your return. Tenants by the entirety. If you and your spouse held property as tenants by the entirety and you file separate federal returns, each of you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid on the property. Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa- ration agreement states that you must pay the real estate taxes for a home owned by you and your spouse, part of your payments may be de- ductible as alimony and part as real estate taxes. See Payments to a third party in Pub. 504 for more information. Ministers’ and military housing allowances. If you are a minister or a member of the uni- formed services and receive a housing allow- ance that you can exclude from income, you still can deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay on your home. Refund (or rebate). If you received a refund or rebate in 2024 of real estate taxes you paid in 2024, you must reduce your deduction by the amount refunded to you. If you received a re- fund or rebate in 2024 of real estate taxes you deducted in an earlier year, you must generally include the refund or rebate in income in the year you receive it. However, the amount you in- clude in income is limited to the amount of the deduction that reduced your tax in the earlier Page 101 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 11 Taxes 99 --- Page 102 --- year. For more information, see Recoveries in Pub. 525. Real Estate-Related Items You Can’t Deduct Payments for the following items generally aren’t deductible as real estate taxes. •T axes for local benefits. •Itemized charges for services (such as trash and garbage pickup fees). •T ransfer taxes (or stamp taxes). •Rent increases due to higher real estate taxes. •Homeowners' association charges. Taxes for local benefits. Deductible real es- tate taxes generally don’t include taxes charged for local benefits and improvements tending to increase the value of your property. These in- clude assessments for streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, public parking facilities, and similar improvements. Y ou should increase the basis of your property by the amount of the as- sessment.Local benefit taxes are deductible only if they are for maintenance, repair, or interest charges related to those benefits. If only a part of the taxes is for maintenance, repair, or inter- est, you must be able to show the amount of that part to claim the deduction. If you can’t de- termine what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or interest, none of it is deductible. T axes for local benefits may be inclu- ded in your real estate tax bill. If your taxing authority (or mortgage lender) doesn’t furnish you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. Y ou should use the rules above to determine if the local benefit tax is de- ductible. Contact the taxing authority if you need additional information about a specific charge on your real estate tax bill. Itemized charges for services. An itemized charge for services assessed against specific property or certain people isn’t a tax, even if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam- ple, you can’t deduct the charge as a real estate tax if it is: •A unit fee for the delivery of a service (such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000 gallons of water you use), CAUTION!•A periodic charge for a residential service (such as a $20 per month or $240 annual fee charged to each homeowner for trash collection), or •A flat fee charged for a single service pro- vided by your government (such as a $30 charge for mowing your lawn because it was allowed to grow higher than permitted under your local ordinance). Y ou must look at your real estate tax bill to determine if any nondeductible item- ized charges, such as those listed above, are included in the bill. If your taxing au- thority (or mortgage lender) doesn’t furnish you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. Exception. Service charges used to main- tain or improve services (such as trash collec- tion or police and fire protection) are deductible as real estate taxes if: •The fees or charges are imposed at a like rate against all property in the taxing juris- diction; •The funds collected aren’t earmarked; in- stead, they are commingled with general revenue funds; and CAUTION!T able 11-1. Which Taxes Can You Deduct? Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Can’t Deduct Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or business or of producing income.Fees and charges that aren’t expenses of your trade or business or of producing income, such as fees for driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges for water bills (see T axes and Fees Y ou Can’t Deduct ). Fines and penalties. Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes. Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary disability plans. Employee contributions to state funds listed under Contributions to state benefit funds . State and local general sales taxes if you choose to deduct state and local income taxes. General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes, including compensating use taxes. State and local income taxes if you choose to deduct state and local general sales taxes. Other Taxes T axes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that aren’t expenses of your trade or business or of producing income. T axes on property producing rent or royalty income. Per capita taxes. One-half of self-employment tax paid. Personal Property TaxesState and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that aren’t expenses of your trade or business or of producing income. Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on someone else (see Division of real estate taxes between buyers and sellers ). T enant's share of real estate taxes paid by a cooperative housing corporation. Foreign real estate taxes. T axes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real Estate -Related Items Y ou Can’t Deduct . T rash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See Real Estate -Related Items Y ou Can’t Deduct . Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes. Homeowners' association charges.Page 102 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 100 Chapter 11 Taxes Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 103 --- •Funds used to maintain or improve serv- ices aren’t limited to or determined by the amount of these fees or charges collected. Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). T ransfer taxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale of a personal home aren’t deductible. If they are paid by the seller, they are expenses of the sale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost basis of the property. Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes. If your landlord increases your rent in the form of a tax surcharge because of in- creased real estate taxes, you can’t deduct the increase as taxes. Homeowners' association charges. These charges aren’t deductible because they are im- posed by the homeowners' association, rather than the state or local government. Personal Property Taxes Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state or local tax that is: •Charged on personal property; •Based only on the value of the personal property; and •Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is col- lected more or less than once a year. A tax that meets the above requirements can be considered charged on personal prop- erty even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. For example, a yearly tax based on value quali- fies as a personal property tax even if it is called a registration fee and is for the privilege of regis- tering motor vehicles or using them on the high- ways. If the tax is partly based on value and partly based on other criteria, it may qualify in part. Example. Y our state charges a yearly motor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50 cents per hundredweight. Y ou paid $32 based on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of your car. Y ou can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) as a personal property tax because it is based on the value. The remaining $17 ($0.50 × 34), based on the weight, isn’t deductible. Taxes and Fees You Can’t Deduct Many federal, state, and local government taxes aren’t deductible because they don’t fall within the categories discussed earlier. Other taxes and fees, such as federal income taxes, aren’t deductible because the tax law specifically pro- hibits a deduction for them. See T able 11 -1. T axes and fees that are generally not deduc- tible include the following items. •Employment taxes. This includes social security, Medicare, and railroad retirement taxes withheld from your pay. However, one-half of self-employment tax you pay is deductible. In addition, the social security and other employment taxes you pay on the wages of a household worker may be included in medical expenses that you can deduct, or childcare expenses that allow you to claim the child and dependent care credit. For more information, see Pub. 502 and Pub. 503. •Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes- sion taxes. Y ou can deduct the estate tax attributable to income in respect of a dece- dent if you, as a beneficiary, must include that income in your gross income. In that case, deduct the estate tax on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. For more information, see Pub. 559. •Federal income taxes. This includes in- come taxes withheld from your pay. •Fines and penalties. Y ou can’t deduct fines and penalties paid to a government for violation of any law, including related amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. •Foreign personal or real property taxes. •Gift taxes. •License fees. Y ou can’t deduct license fees for personal purposes (such as mar- riage, driver's, and pet license fees). •Per capita taxes. Y ou can’t deduct state or local per capita taxes. Many taxes and fees other than those listed above are also nondeductible, unless they are ordinary and necessary expenses of a business or income -producing activity. For other nonde- ductible items, see Real Estate -Related Items Y ou Can’t Deduct , earlier. Where To Deduct Y ou deduct taxes on the following schedules. State and local income taxes. These taxes are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a, even if your only source of income is from business, rents, or royalties. Limitation on deduction for state and lo- cal taxes. The deduction for state and local taxes is limited to $10,000 ($5,000 if married fil- ing married separately). State and local taxes are the taxes that you include on Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 5a, 5b, and 5c. Include taxes imposed by a U.S. territory with your state and local taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 5a, 5b, and 5c. However, don't include any U.S. territory taxes you paid that are allocable to ex- cluded income. Y ou may want to take a credit for U.S. territory tax instead of a deduction. See the instructions for Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 1, for details. General sales taxes. Sales taxes are deduc- ted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a. Y ou must check the box on line 5a. If you elect to deduct sales taxes, you can’t deduct state and local income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a. Foreign income taxes. Generally, income taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. terri- tory can be claimed as an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6, or as a TIPcredit against your U.S. income tax on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 1. T o claim the credit, you may have to complete and attach Form 1116. For more information, see the Instructions for Form 1040 or Pub. 514. Real estate taxes and personal property taxes. Real estate and personal property taxes are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 5b and 5c, respectively, unless they are paid on property used in your business, in which case they are deducted on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). T axes on property that produces rent or royalty income are deduc- ted on Schedule E (Form 1040). Self-employment tax. Deduct one- half of your self- employment tax on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 15. Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are de- ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6. 12. Other Itemized Deductions What's New Standard mileage rate. The 2024 rate for business use of a vehicle is 67 cents a mile. Reminders No miscellaneous itemized deductions al- lowed. Y ou can no longer claim any miscella- neous itemized deductions. Miscellaneous itemized deductions are those deductions that would have been subject to the 2% -of-adjus- ted-gross- income (AGI) limitation. See Miscella- neous Itemized Deductions , later. Fines and penalties. Rules regarding deduct- ing fines and penalties have changed. See Fines and Penalties , later. Introduction This chapter explains that you can no longer claim any miscellaneous itemized deductions, unless you fall into one of the qualified catego- ries of employment claiming a deduction relat- ing to unreimbursed employee expenses. Mis- cellaneous itemized deductions are those deductions that would have been subject to the 2%-of- AGI limitation. Y ou can still claim certain expenses as itemized deductions on Sched- ule A (Form 1040), Schedule A (Form 1040- NR), or as an adjustment to income on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. This chapter covers the following topics. •Miscellaneous itemized deductions.Page 103 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions 101 --- Page 104 --- •Expenses you can't deduct. •Expenses you can deduct. •How to report your deductions. Y ou must keep records to verify your deductions. Y ou should keep receipts, canceled checks, substitute checks, fi- nancial account statements, and other docu- mentary evidence. For more information on re- cordkeeping, see What Records Should I Keep? in chapter 1. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 463 T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses 525 T axable and Nontaxable Income 529 Miscellaneous Deductions 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts 575 Pension and Annuity Income 587 Business Use of Y our Home 946 How T o Depreciate Property Form (and Instructions) Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions 2106 Employee Business Expenses 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) Beneficiary's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Miscellaneous Itemized Deductions Y ou can no longer claim any miscellaneous itemized deductions that are subject to the 2%-of- AGI limitation, including unreimbursed employee expenses. However, you may be able to deduct certain unreimbursed employee busi- ness expenses if you fall into one of the follow- ing categories of employment listed under Un- reimbursed Employee Expenses next. Unreimbursed Employee Expenses Y ou can no longer claim a deduction for unreim- bursed employee expenses unless you fall into one of the following categories of employment. •Armed Forces reservists. •Qualified performing artists. •Fee-basis state or local government offi- cials. •Employees with impairment-related work expenses. Categories of Employment Y ou can deduct unreimbursed employee expen- ses only if you qualify as an Armed Forces re- servist, a qualified performing artist, a fee -basis RECORDS 463 525 529 547 575 587 946 Schedule A (Form 1040) 2106 8839 Schedule K-1 (Form 1041)state or local government official, or an em- ployee with impairment-related work expenses. Armed Forces reservist (member of a re- serve component). Y ou are a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States if you are in the Army, Navy, Ma- rine Corps, Air Force, or Coast Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard of the United States; or the Reserve Corps of the Public Health Serv- ice. Qualified performing artist. Y ou are a qualified performing artist if you: 1.Performed services in the performing arts as an employee for at least two employers during the tax year, 2.Received from at least two of the employ- ers wages of $200 or more per employer, 3.Had allowable business expenses attribut- able to the performing arts of more than 10% of gross income from the performing arts, and 4.Had AGI of $16,000 or less before deduct- ing expenses as a performing artist. Fee- basis state or local government offi- cial. Y ou are a qualifying fee -basis official if you are employed by a state or political subdivi- sion of a state and are compensated, in whole or in part, on a fee basis. Employee with impairment -related work expenses. Impairment- related work expenses are the allowable expenses of an individual with physical or mental disabilities for attendant care at their place of employment. They also include other expenses in connection with the place of employment that enable the employee to work. See Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses, for more details. Allowable unreimbursed employee expen- ses. If you qualify as an employee in one of the categories mentioned above, you may be able to deduct the following items as unreim- bursed employee expenses. Unreimbursed employee expenses for indi- viduals in these categories of employment are deducted as adjustments to gross income. Qualified employees listed in one of the catego- ries above must complete Form 2106, Em- ployee Business Expenses, to take the deduc- tion. Y ou can deduct only unreimbursed em- ployee expenses that are paid or incurred dur- ing your tax year, for carrying on your trade or business of being an employee, and ordinary and necessary. An expense is ordinary if it's common and accepted in your trade, business, or profession. An expense is necessary if it's appropriate and helpful to your business. An expense doesn't have to be required to be considered neces- sary. Educator Expenses If you were an eligible educator in 2024, you can deduct up to $300 of qualified expenses you paid in 2024 as an adjustment to gross in- come on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 11, rather than as a miscellaneous itemized deduction. If you and your spouse are filing jointly and both of you were eligible educators, the maximum deduction is $600. However, nei- ther spouse can deduct more than $300 of their qualified expenses. For additional information, see Educator Expenses in Pub. 529, Miscella- neous Deductions. Educator expenses include amounts paid or incurred in 2024 for personal protective equipment, disinfectant, and other supplies used for the prevention of the spread of coronavirus. For more information, see the instructions for Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 11, and Educator Expenses in Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. Expenses You Can’t Deduct Because of the suspension of miscellaneous itemized deductions, there are two categories of expenses you can't deduct: miscellaneous item- ized deductions subject to the 2% -of-AGI limita- tion, and those expenses that are traditionally nondeductible under the Internal Revenue Code. Both categories of deduction are dis- cussed next. Miscellaneous Deductions Subject to 2% AGI Unless you fall into one of the qualified catego- ries of employment under Unreimbursed Em- ployee Expenses , earlier, miscellaneous item- ized deductions that are subject to the 2%-of- AGI limitation can no longer be claimed. For expenses not related to unreimbursed em- ployee expenses, you generally can't deduct the following expenses, even if you fall into one of the qualified categories of employment listed earlier. Appraisal Fees Appraisal fees you pay to figure a casualty loss or the fair market value of donated property are miscellaneous itemized deductions and can no longer be deducted. Casualty and Theft Losses Damaged or stolen property used in performing services as an employee is a miscellaneous de- duction and can no longer be deducted. For other casualty and theft losses, see Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. Clerical Help and Office Rent Office expenses, such as rent and clerical help, you pay in connection with your investments and collecting taxable income on those invest- ments are miscellaneous itemized deductions and are no longer deductible. Credit or Debit Card Convenience Fees The convenience fee charged by the card pro- cessor for paying your income tax (including es- timated tax payments) by credit or debit card is a miscellaneous itemized deduction and is no longer deductible. TIPPage 104 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 102 Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 105 --- Depreciation on Home Computer If you use your home computer to produce in- come (for example, to manage your investments that produce taxable income), the depreciation of the computer for that part of the usage of the computer is a miscellaneous itemized deduc- tion and is no longer deductible. Fees To Collect Interest and Dividends Fees you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or simi- lar agent to collect your taxable bond interest or dividends on shares of stock are miscellaneous itemized deductions and can no longer be de- ducted. Hobby Expenses A hobby isn't a business because it isn't carried on to make a profit. Hobby expenses are mis- cellaneous itemized deductions and can no lon- ger be deducted. Indirect Deductions of Pass-Through Entities Pass- through entities include partnerships, S corporations, and mutual funds that aren't pub- licly offered. Deductions of pass -through enti- ties are passed through to the partners or shareholders. The partner’s or shareholder’s share of passed -through deductions for invest- ment expenses are miscellaneous itemized de- ductions and can no longer be deducted. Nonpublicly offered mutual funds. These funds will send you a Form 1099 -DIV , Dividends and Distributions, or a substitute form, showing your share of gross income and investment ex- penses. The investment expenses reported on Form 1099 -DIV are a miscellaneous itemized deduction and are no longer deductible. Investment Fees and Expenses Investment fees, custodial fees, trust adminis- tration fees, and other expenses you paid for managing your investments that produce taxa- ble income are miscellaneous itemized deduc- tions and are no longer deductible. Legal Expenses Y ou can usually deduct legal expenses that you incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable income or that you pay in connection with the determination, collection, or refund of any tax. Legal expenses that you incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable income, or that you pay in connection with the determination, col- lection, or refund of any tax are miscellaneous itemized deductions and are no longer deducti- ble. Y ou can deduct expenses of resolving tax is- sues relating to profit or loss from business re- ported on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business, from rentals or royalties reported on Schedule E (Form 1040), Supple- mental Income and Loss, or from farm income and expenses reported on Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, on that schedule. Expenses for resolving nonbusiness tax issues are miscellaneous itemized deduc- tions and are no longer deductible.Loss on Deposits For information on whether, and if so, how, you may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualified financial institution, see Loss on Deposits in Pub. 547. Repayments of Income Generally, repayments of amounts that you in- cluded in income in an earlier year is a miscella- neous itemized deduction and can no longer be deducted. If you had to repay more than $3,000 that you included in your income in an earlier year, you may be able to deduct the amount. See Repayments Under Claim of Right , later. Repayments of Social Security Benefits For information on how to deduct your repay- ments of certain social security benefits, see Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chapter 7. Safe Deposit Box Rent Rent you pay for a safe deposit box you use to store taxable income -producing stocks, bonds, or investment- related papers is a miscellaneous itemized deduction and can no longer be de- ducted. Y ou also can't deduct the rent if you use the box for jewelry, other personal items, or tax-exempt securities. Service Charges on Dividend Reinvestment Plans Service charges you pay as a subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan are a miscellaneous itemized deduction and can no longer be de- ducted. These service charges include pay- ments for: •Holding shares acquired through a plan, •Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends, and •Keeping individual records and providing detailed statements of accounts. Tax Preparation Fees T ax preparation fees on the return for the year in which you pay them are a miscellaneous item- ized deduction and can no longer be deducted. These fees include the cost of tax preparation software programs and tax publications. They also include any fee you paid for electronic filing of your return. Trustee's Administrative Fees for IRA T rustee's administrative fees that are billed sep- arately and paid by you in connection with your IRA are a miscellaneous itemized deduction and can no longer be deducted. For more infor- mation about IRAs, see chapter 9 .Nondeductible Expenses In addition to the miscellaneous itemized de- ductions discussed earlier, you can't deduct the following expenses. List of Nondeductible Expenses •Adoption expenses. •Broker's commissions. •Burial or funeral expenses, including the cost of a cemetery lot. •Campaign expenses. •Capital expenses. •Check-writing fees. •Club dues. •Commuting expenses. •Fees and licenses, such as car licenses, marriage licenses, and dog tags. •Fines or penalties. •Health spa expenses. •Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses , earlier. •Home repairs, insurance, and rent. •Home security system. •Illegal bribes and kickbacks. •Investment-related seminars. •Life insurance premiums paid by the in- sured. •Lobbying expenses. •Losses from the sale of your home, furni- ture, personal car, etc. •Lost or misplaced cash or property. •Lunches with co-workers. •Meals while working late. •Medical expenses as business expenses other than medical examinations required by your employer. •Personal disability insurance premiums. •Personal legal expenses. •Personal, living, or family expenses. •Political contributions. •Professional accreditation fees. •Professional reputation improvement ex- pense. •Relief fund contributions. •Residential telephone line. •Stockholders’ meeting attendance expen- ses. •T ax-exempt income earning/collecting ex- penses. •The value of wages never received or lost vacation time. •T ravel expenses for another individual. •Voluntary unemployment benefit fund con- tributions.Page 105 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions 103 --- Page 106 --- •Wristwatches. Adoption Expenses Y ou can't deduct the expenses of adopting a child, but you may be able to take a credit for those expenses. See the Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more information. Campaign Expenses Y ou can't deduct campaign expenses of a can- didate for any office, even if the candidate is running for reelection to the office. These in- clude qualification and registration fees for pri- mary elections. Legal fees. Y ou can't deduct legal fees paid to defend charges that arise from participation in a political campaign. Check-Writing Fees on Personal Account If you have a personal checking account, you can't deduct fees charged by the bank for the privilege of writing checks, even if the account pays interest. Club Dues Generally, you can't deduct the cost of member- ship in any club organized for business, pleas- ure, recreation, or other social purpose. This in- cludes business, social, athletic, luncheon, sporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs. Y ou can't deduct dues paid to an organiza- tion if one of its main purposes is to: •Conduct entertainment activities for mem- bers or their guests, or •Provide members or their guests with ac- cess to entertainment facilities. Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon clubs aren't deductible. Commuting Expenses Y ou can't deduct commuting expenses (the cost of transportation between your home and your main or regular place of work). If you haul tools, instruments, or other items in your car to and from work, you can deduct only the additional cost of hauling the items such as the rent on a trailer to carry the items. Fines and Penalties Generally, no deduction is allowed for fines and penalties paid to a government or specified nongovernmental entity for the violation of any law except in the following situations. •Amounts that constitute restitution. •Amounts paid to come into compliance with the law. •Amounts paid or incurred as the result of certain court orders in which no govern- ment or specified nongovernmental agency is a party. •Amounts paid or incurred for taxes due. Nondeductible amounts include an amount paid in settlement of your actual or potential lia- bility for a fine or penalty (civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include amounts paid such as park- ing tickets, tax penalties, and penalties deduc- ted from teachers' paychecks after an illegal strike. No deduction is allowed for the restitution amount or amount paid to come into compli- ance with the law unless the amounts are spe- cifically identified in the settlement agreement or court order. Also, any amount paid or incur- red as reimbursement to the government for the costs of any investigation or litigation are not eli- gible for the exceptions and are nondeductible. Health Spa Expenses Y ou can't deduct health spa expenses, even if there is a job requirement to stay in excellent physical condition, such as might be required of a law enforcement officer. Home Security System Y ou can't deduct the cost of a home security system as a miscellaneous deduction. How- ever, you may be able to claim a deduction for a home security system as a business expense if you have a home office. See Security system under Figuring the Deduction in Pub. 587. Investment-Related Seminars Y ou can't deduct any expenses for attending a convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in- vestment purposes. Life Insurance Premiums Y ou can't deduct premiums you pay on your life insurance. Y ou may be able to deduct, as ali- mony, premiums you pay on life insurance poli- cies assigned to your former spouse. See Pub. 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, for in- formation on alimony. Lobbying Expenses Y ou generally can't deduct amounts paid or in- curred for lobbying expenses. These include ex- penses to: •Influence legislation; •Participate or intervene in any political campaign for, or against, any candidate for public office; •Attempt to influence the general public, or segments of the public, about elections, legislative matters, or referendums; or •Communicate directly with covered execu- tive branch officials in any attempt to influ- ence the official actions or positions of those officials. Lobbying expenses also include any amounts paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan- ning, or coordination of any of these activities. Dues used for lobbying. If a tax -exempt organization notifies you that part of the dues or other amounts you pay to the organization are used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses, you can't deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex- penses in Pub. 529 for information on excep- tions.Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property Y ou can't deduct a loss based on the mere dis- appearance of money or property. However, an accidental loss or disappearance of property can qualify as a casualty if it results from an identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. See Pub. 547 for more information. Lunches With Co-Workers Y ou can't deduct the expenses of lunches with co-workers, except while traveling away from home on business. See Pub. 463 for information on deductible expenses while traveling away from home. Meals While Working Late Y ou can't deduct the cost of meals while work- ing late. However, you may be able to claim a deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible entertainment expense, or if you're traveling away from home. See Pub. 463 for information on deductible entertainment expenses and ex- penses while traveling away from home. Personal Legal Expenses Y ou can't deduct personal legal expenses such as those for the following. •Custody of children. •Breach of promise to marry suit. •Civil or criminal charges resulting from a personal relationship. •Damages for personal injury, except for certain unlawful discrimination and whis- tle-blower claims. •Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec- tion of a title). •Preparation of a will. •Property claims or property settlement in a divorce. Y ou can't deduct these expenses even if a result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in- come-producing property. Political Contributions Y ou can't deduct contributions made to a politi- cal candidate, a campaign committee, or a newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention bulletins and admissions to dinners or programs that benefit a political party or political candi- date aren't deductible. Professional Accreditation Fees Y ou can't deduct professional accreditation fees such as the following. •Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini- tial right to practice accounting. •Bar exam fees and incidental expenses in securing initial admission to the bar. •Medical and dental license fees paid to get initial licensing. Professional Reputation Y ou can't deduct expenses of radio and TV ap- pearances to increase your personal prestige or establish your professional reputation.Page 106 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 104 Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 107 --- Relief Fund Contributions Y ou can't deduct contributions paid to a private plan that pays benefits to any covered em- ployee who can't work because of any injury or illness not related to the job. Residential Telephone Service Y ou can't deduct any charge (including taxes) for basic local telephone service for the first tel- ephone line to your residence, even if it's used in a trade or business. Stockholders' Meetings Y ou can't deduct transportation and other ex- penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet- ings of companies in which you own stock but have no other interest. Y ou can't deduct these expenses even if you're attending the meeting to get information that would be useful in mak- ing further investments. Tax-Exempt Income Expenses Y ou can't deduct expenses to produce tax -ex- empt income. Y ou can't deduct interest on a debt incurred or continued to buy or carry tax-exempt securities. If you have expenses to produce both taxa- ble and tax -exempt income, but you can't iden- tify the expenses that produce each type of in- come, you must divide the expenses based on the amount of each type of income to determine the amount that you can deduct. Travel Expenses for Another Individual Y ou generally can't deduct travel expenses you pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or other individual who accompanies you (or your em- ployee) on business or personal travel unless the spouse, dependent, or other individual is an employee of the taxpayer, the travel is for a bona fide business purpose, and such expen- ses would otherwise be deductible by the spouse, dependent, or other individual. See Pub. 463 for more information on deductible travel expenses. Voluntary Unemployment Benefit Fund Contributions Y ou can't deduct voluntary unemployment ben- efit fund contributions you make to a union fund or a private fund. However, you can deduct con- tributions as taxes if state law requires you to make them to a state unemployment fund that covers you for the loss of wages from unem- ployment caused by business conditions. Wristwatches Y ou can't deduct the cost of a wristwatch, even if there is a job requirement that you know the correct time to properly perform your duties.Expenses You Can Deduct Y ou can deduct the items listed below as item- ized deductions. Report these items on Sched- ule A (Form 1040), line 16, or Schedule A (Form 1040-NR), line 7. List of Deductions Each of the following items is discussed in de- tail after the list (except where indicated). •Amortizable premium on taxable bonds. •Casualty and theft losses from income- producing property. •Excess deductions of an estate or trust. •Federal estate tax on income in respect of a decedent. •Gambling losses up to the amount of gam- bling winnings. •Impairment-related work expenses of per- sons with disabilities. •Losses from Ponzi-type investment schemes (see Pub. 547 for more informa- tion). •Repayments of more than $3,000 under a claim of right. •Unlawful discrimination claims. •Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Amortizable Premium on Taxable Bonds In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is greater than its stated principal amount, the ex- cess is bond premium. Y ou can elect to amor- tize the premium on taxable bonds. The amorti- zation of the premium is generally an offset to interest income on the bond rather than a sepa- rate deduction item. Part of the premium on some bonds may be an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information, see Amortizable Premium on T axable Bonds in Pub. 529, and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 of Pub. 550, Investment Income and Expenses. Casualty and Theft Losses of Income-Producing Property Y ou can deduct a casualty or theft loss as an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if the damaged or stolen property was income- producing property (property held for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds, gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, report the loss in Form 4684, Section B. Y ou may also have to include the loss on Form 4797 if you're otherwise required to file that form. T o figure your deduction, add all casualty or theft losses from this type of property included on Form 4684, lines 32 and 38b, or Form 4797, line 18a. For more information on casualty and theft los- ses, see Pub. 547.Excess Deductions of an Estate or Trust Generally, if an estate or trust has an excess de- duction resulting from total deductions being greater than its gross income, in the estate’s or trust's last tax year, a beneficiary can deduct the excess deductions, depending on its character. The excess deductions retain their character as an adjustment to arrive at adjusted gross in- come on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), as a non- miscellaneous itemized deduction reported on Schedule A (Form 1040), or as a miscellane- ous itemized deduction. For more information on excess deductions of an estate or trust, see the Instructions for Schedule K -1 (Form 1041) for a Beneficiary Filing Form 1040. Federal Estate Tax on Income in Respect of a Decedent Y ou can deduct the federal estate tax attributa- ble to income in respect of a decedent that you as a beneficiary include in your gross income. Income in respect of the decedent is gross in- come that the decedent would have received had death not occurred and that wasn't properly includible in the decedent's final income tax re- turn. See Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administrators, for more information. Gambling Losses up to the Amount of Gambling Winnings Y ou must report the full amount of your gam- bling winnings for the year on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8b. Y ou deduct your gambling losses for the year on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. Y ou can't deduct gambling losses that are more than your winnings. Y ou can't reduce your gambling win- nings by your gambling losses and re- port the difference. Y ou must report the full amount of your winnings as income and claim your losses (up to the amount of win- nings) as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your records should show your winnings sepa- rately from your losses. Diary of winnings and losses. Y ou must keep an accurate diary or similar record of your losses and winnings. Y our diary should contain at least the following information. •The date and type of your specific wager or wagering activity. •The name and address or location of the gambling establishment. •The names of other persons present with you at the gambling establishment. •The amount(s) you won or lost. See Pub. 529 for more information. Impairment-Related Work Expenses If you have a physical or mental disability that limits your being employed, or substantially lim- its one or more of your major life activities, such as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, learning, and working, you can deduct your impairment-related work expenses. CAUTION! RECORDSPage 107 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions 105 --- Page 108 --- Impairment- related work expenses are ordi- nary and necessary business expenses for at- tendant care services at your place of work and for other expenses in connection with your place of work that are necessary for you to be able to work. Self- employed. If you're self -employed, en- ter your impairment -related work expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C (Form 1040), Schedule E (Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form 1040)) used to report your business income and expenses. Repayments Under Claim of Right If you had to repay more than $3,000 that you included in your income in an earlier year be- cause at the time you thought you had an unre- stricted right to it, you may be able to deduct the amount you repaid or take a credit against your tax. See Repayments in chapter 8 for more in- formation. Unlawful Discrimination Claims Y ou may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24h, attorney fees and court costs for actions settled or decided after October 22, 2004, involving a claim of unlawful discrimination, a claim against the U.S. Government, or a claim made under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. However, the amount you can deduct on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24h, is limited to the amount of the judgment or settlement you are including in income for the tax year. See Pub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income, for more information.Unrecovered Investment in Annuity A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu- ity can exclude from income a part of each pay- ment received as a tax -free return of the retir- ee's investment. If the retiree dies before the entire investment is recovered tax free, any un- recovered investment can be deducted on the retiree's final income tax return. See Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income, for more informa- tion about the tax treatment of pensions and an- nuities.Page 108 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 106 Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 109 --- Part Four. Figuring Your Taxes, and Refundable and Nonrefundable CreditsThe two chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax. They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions, are subtracted directly from your tax and reduce your tax dollar for dollar. The Form 1040 and 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these chapters are: •Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income; •Schedule 2, Additional T axes; and •Schedule 3, Additional Credits and Payments. 13. How To Figure Your Tax Introduction After you have figured your income and deduc- tions, your next step is to figure your tax. This chapter discusses: •The general steps you take to figure your tax, •An additional tax you may have to pay called the alternative minimum tax (AMT), and •The conditions you must meet if you want the IRS to figure your tax. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Publication 503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses 505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax 525 T axable and Nontaxable Income 531 Reporting Tip Income 550 Investment Income and Expenses 560 Retirement Plans for Small Business (SEP , SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans) 575 Pension and Annuity Income 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC) 926 Household Employer’s T ax Guide 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other T ax-Favored Health Plans 970 T ax Benefits for Education 974 Premium T ax Credit (PTC) 503 505 525 531 550 560 575 596 926 969 970 974Form (and Instructions) W-2 Wage and T ax Statement Schedule R (Form 1040) Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Schedule SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment T ax Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) Credits for Qualifying Children and Other Dependents 1116 Foreign T ax Credit 3800 General Business Credit 4136 Credit for Federal T ax Paid on Fuels 4970 T ax on Accumulation Distribution of T rusts 5329 Additional T axes on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and Other T ax-Favored Accounts 5405 Repayment of the First-Time Homebuyer Credit 5695 Residential Energy Credits 5884 Work Opportunity Credit 8396 Mortgage Interest Credit 8801 Credit for Prior Y ear Minimum T ax—Individuals, Estates, and T rusts 8835 Renewable Electricity Production Credit 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses 8846 Credit for Employer Social Security and Medicare T axes Paid on Certain Employee Tips 8853 Archer MSAs and Long-T erm Care Insurance Contracts 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement Savings Contributions 8889 Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit 8912 Credit to Holders of T ax Credit Bonds 8936 Clean Vehicle Credits 8959 Additional Medicare T ax W-2 Schedule R (Form 1040) Schedule SE (Form 1040) Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) 1116 3800 4136 4970 5329 5405 5695 5884 8396 8801 8835 8839 8846 8853 8880 8889 8910 8912 8936 89598960 Net Investment Income T ax—Individuals, Estates, and T rusts 8962 Premium T ax Credit (PTC) Figuring Your Tax Y our income tax is based on your taxable in- come. After you figure your income tax and AMT , if any, subtract your tax credits and add any other taxes you may owe. The result is your total tax. Compare your total tax with your total payments to determine whether you are entitled to a refund or must make a payment. This section provides a general outline of how to figure your tax. Y ou can find step -by-step directions in the Instructions for Form 1040. Tax. Most taxpayers use either the T ax T able or the T ax Computation Worksheet to figure their income tax. However, there are special meth- ods if your income includes any of the following items. •A net capital gain. See Pub. 550. •Qualified dividends taxed at the same rates as a net capital gain. See Pub. 550. •Lump-sum distributions. See Pub. 575. •Farming or fishing income. See Schedule J (Form 1040). •T ax for certain children who have unearned income. See Form 8615. •Parent's election to report child's interest and dividends. See Form 8814. •Foreign earned income exclusion or the housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For- eign Earned Income, and the Foreign Earned Income T ax Worksheet in the In- structions for Form 1040.) Credits. After you figure your income tax and any AMT (discussed later), determine if you are eligible for any tax credits. Eligibility information for these tax credits is discussed in other publi- cations and your form instructions. The follow- ing items are some of the credits you may be able to subtract from your tax and shows where you can find more information on each credit. •Adoption credit. See Form 8839. •Alternative motor vehicle credit. See Form 8910. 8960 8962Page 109 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 13 How To Figure Your Tax 107 --- Page 110 --- •Child and dependent care credit. See Pub. 503. •Child tax credit. See Schedule 8812 (Form 1040). •Credit for employer social security and Medicare taxes paid on certain employee tips. See Form 8846. •Credit to holders of tax credit bonds. See Form 8912. •Education credit. See Pub. 970. •Elderly or disabled credit. See Schedule R (Form 1040). •Foreign tax credit. See Form 1116. •General business credit. See Form 3800. •Mortgage interest credit. See Form 8396. •Clean vehicle credits. See Form 8936. •Premium tax credit. See Pub. 974. •Prior year minimum tax credit. See Form 8801. •Renewable electricity production credit. See Form 8835. •Residential clean energy credit. See Form 5695. •Retirement savings contribution credit. See Form 8880. •Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884. Some credits (such as the earned income credit) aren’t listed because they are treated as payments. See Payments , later. Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred- its, determine whether there are any other taxes you must pay. This chapter doesn’t explain these other taxes. Y ou can find that information in other publications and your form instructions. See the following list for other taxes you may need to add to your income tax. •Additional Medicare tax. See Form 8959. •Additional tax on ABLE accounts. See Pub. 969. •Additional tax on Archer MSAs and long-term care insurance contracts. See Form 8853. •Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. See Form 5329. •Additional tax on HSAs. See Form 8889. •Additional tax on income you received from a nonqualified deferred compensation plan that fails to meet certain requirements. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Additional tax on qualified plans and other tax-favored accounts. See Form 5329. •Additional tax on qualified retirement plans and IRAs. See Form 5329. •Additional tax on qualified tuition pro- grams. See Pub. 970. •Excise tax on insider stock compensation from an expatriated corporation. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Household employment taxes. See Pub. 926. •Interest on the deferred tax on gain from certain installment sales with a sales price over $150,000. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Interest on the tax due on installment in- come from the sale of certain residential lots and timeshares. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Net investment income tax. See Form 8960. •Recapture of an education credit. See Pub. 970. •Recapture of other credits. See the Instruc- tions for Form 1040. •Repayment of first-time homebuyer credit. See Form 5405. •Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. See Pub. 560. •Self-employment tax. See Schedule SE (Form 1040). •Social security and Medicare tax on tips. See Pub. 531. •Social security and Medicare tax on wa- ges. See Pub. 525. •T ax on accumulation distribution of trusts. See Form 4970. •T ax on golden parachute payments. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Uncollected social security and Medicare tax on group-term life insurance. See Form W-2. •Uncollected social security and Medicare tax on tips. See Pub. 531. Y ou may also have to pay AMT (discussed later in this chapter). Payments. After you determine your total tax, figure the total payments you have already made for the year. Include credits that are trea- ted as payments. This chapter doesn’t explain these payments and credits. Y ou can find that information in other publications and your form instructions. See the following list of payments and credits that you may be able to include in your total payments. •American opportunity credit. See Pub. 970. •Additional child tax credit. See Schedule 8812 (Form 1040). •Credit for federal tax on fuels. See Form 4136. •Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Earned income credit. See Pub. 596. •Estimated tax paid. See Pub. 505. •Excess social security and RRTA tax with- held. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •Federal income tax withheld. See Pub. 505. •Net premium tax credit. See the Instruc- tions for Form 8962 or the Instructions for Form 1040. •Qualified sick and family leave credits. See the Instructions for Form 1040. •T ax paid with extension. See the Instruc- tions for Form 1040.Refund or balance due. T o determine whether you are entitled to a refund or whether you must make a payment, compare your total payments with your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, see your form instructions for infor- mation on having it directly deposited into one or more of your accounts (including a traditional IRA, Roth IRA, or a SEP-IRA). Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) This section briefly discusses an additional tax you may have to pay. The tax law gives special treatment to some kinds of income and allows special deductions and credits for some kinds of expenses. T ax- payers who benefit from this special treatment may have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax through an additional tax called AMT . Y ou may have to pay the AMT if your taxable income for regular tax purposes, combined with certain adjustments and tax preference items, is more than a certain amount. See Form 6251, Alternative Minimum T ax—Individuals. Adjustments and tax preference items. The more common adjustments and tax preference items include: •Addition of the standard deduction (if claimed); •Addition of itemized deductions claimed for state and local taxes and certain interest; •Subtraction of any refund of state and local taxes included in gross income; •Changes to accelerated depreciation of certain property; •Difference between gain or loss on the sale of property reported for regular tax purpo- ses and AMT purposes; •Addition of certain income from incentive stock options; •Change in certain passive activity loss de- ductions; •Addition of certain depletion that is more than the adjusted basis of the property; •Addition of part of the deduction for certain intangible drilling costs; and •Addition of tax-exempt interest on certain private activity bonds. More information. For more information about the AMT , see the Instructions for Form 6251. Tax Figured by the IRS If you file by the due date of your return (not counting extensions) —April 15, 2025, for most people— you can have the IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040 or 1040-SR. If the IRS figures your tax and you paid too much, you will receive a refund. If you didn’t pay enough, you will receive a bill for the balance. T o avoid interest or the penalty for late payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of the date of the bill or by the due date for your return, whichever is later.Page 110 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 108 Chapter 13 How To Figure Your Tax Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 111 --- The IRS can also figure the credit for the eld- erly or the disabled and the earned income credit for you. When the IRS cannot figure your tax. The IRS can’t figure your tax for you if any of the fol- lowing apply. 1.Y ou want your refund directly deposited into your checking or savings account. 2.Y ou want any part of your refund applied to your 2025 estimated tax. 3.Y ou had income for the year from sources other than wages, salaries, tips, interest, dividends, taxable social security benefits, unemployment compensation, IRA distri- butions, pensions, and annuities. 4.Y our taxable income is $100,000 or more. 5.Y ou itemize deductions. 6.Y ou file any of the following forms. a.Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income. b.Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- care T ax on Unreported Tip Income. c.Form 4970, T ax on Accumulation Dis- tribution of T rusts. d.Form 4972, T ax on Lump-Sum Distri- butions. e.Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. f.Form 6251, Alternative Minimum T ax—Individuals. g.Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs. h.Form 8615, T ax for Certain Children Who Have Unearned Income. i.Form 8814, Parents' Election T o Re- port Child's Interest and Dividends. j.Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex- penses. k.Form 8853, Archer MSAs and Long-T erm Care Insurance Contracts. l.Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts (HSAs). m.Form 8919, Uncollected Social Secur- ity and Medicare T ax on Wages. Filing the Return After you complete the line entries for the tax form you are filing, fill in your name and ad- dress. Enter your social security number in the space provided. If you are married, enter the so- cial security numbers of you and your spouse, even if you file separately. Sign and date your return and enter your occupation(s). If you are filing a joint return, both you and your spouse must sign it. Enter your daytime phone number in the space provided. This may help speed the processing of your return if we have a question that can be answered over the phone. If you are filing a joint return, you may enter either your or your spouse's daytime phone number. If you want to allow your preparer, a friend, a family member, or any other person you choose to discuss your 2024 tax return with the IRS, check the “Y es” box in the “Third Party Desig- nee” area on your return. Also, enter the designee's name, phone number, and any five digits the designee chooses as their personal identification number (PIN). If you check the “Y es” box, you, and your spouse if filing a joint return, are authorizing the IRS to call the desig- nee to answer any questions that may arise dur- ing the processing of your return. Fill in and attach any schedules and forms asked for on the lines you completed to your pa- per return. Attach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 to your paper return. Also, attach to your paper return any Form 1099-R you received that has withholding tax in box 4. Mail your return to the Internal Revenue Service Center for the area where you live. A list of Service Center addresses is in the instruc- tions for your tax return. Form 1040 or 1040-SR Line Entries If you want the IRS to figure your tax. Read Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, lines 1 through 15, and Schedule 1 (Form 1040), if applicable. Fill in the lines that apply to you and attach Schedule 1 (Form 1040), if applicable. Don’t complete Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 16 or 17. If you are filing a joint return, use the space on the dotted line next to the words “Adjusted Gross Income” on the first page of your return to separately show your taxable income and your spouse's taxable income. Read Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, lines 19 through 33, and Schedules 2 and 3 (Form 1040), if applicable. Fill in the lines that apply to you and attach Schedules 2 and 3 (Form 1040), if applicable. Don’t fill in Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, lines 22, 24, 33, or 34 through 38. Don’t fill in Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 2 or 3. Also, don’t complete Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 6d, if you are completing Schedule R (Form 1040), or Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 27, if you want the IRS to figure the credits shown on those lines. Payments. If you have federal income tax with- held that is shown on Form W -2, box 2; Form 1099, box 4; Form W-2G, box 4; or another form (see the Instructions for Form 1040 for more in- formation), enter the amount on Form 1040 or 1040- SR, line 25. Enter any estimated tax pay- ments you made on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 26. Credit for child and dependent care expen- ses. If you can take this credit, complete Form 2441 and attach it to your paper return. Enter the amount of the credit on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 2. The IRS will not figure this credit. Net premium tax credit. If you take this credit, complete Form 8962, Premium T ax Credit (PTC), and attach it to your return. Enter the amount of the credit on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 9. The IRS will not figure this credit. Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you can take this credit, the IRS can figure it for you. Enter “CFE” on the line next to Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 6d, and attach Schedule R (Form 1040) to your paper return. On Sched- ule R (Form 1040), check the box in Part I for your filing status and age. Complete Parts II and III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply. Earned income credit. If you can take this credit, the IRS can figure it for you. Enter “EIC” on the dotted line on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 27. If you elect to use your nontaxable com-bat pay in figuring your EIC, enter the amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 1i. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill in Schedule EIC (Form 1040), Earned Income Credit, and attach it to your paper return. If you don’t provide the child's social security number on Schedule EIC, line 2, the credit will be re- duced or disallowed unless the child was born and died in 2024. If your credit for any year after 1996 was re- duced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also have to file Form 8862 with your return. For de- tails, see the Instructions for Form 1040. 14. Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents What’s New ACTC amount increased. The maximum amount of ACTC for each qualifying child in- creased to $1,700. Reminders Schedule 8812 (Form 1040). The Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) and its instructions are the single source for figuring and reporting the child tax credit, credit for other dependents, and ad- ditional child tax credit. The instructions now in- clude all applicable worksheets for figuring these credits. As a result, Pub. 972, Child T ax Credit , won’t be revised. For prior -year versions of Pub. 972, go to IRS.gov/Pub972 . Abbreviations used throughout this chap- ter. The following abbreviations will be used in this chapter when appropriate. •ACTC means additional child tax credit. •ATIN means adoption taxpayer identifica- tion number. •CTC means child tax credit. •ITIN means individual taxpayer identifica- tion number. •ODC means credit for other dependents. •SSN means social security number. •TIN means taxpayer identification number. A TIN may be an ATIN, an ITIN, or an SSN. Other abbreviations may be used in this chapter and will be defined as needed. Delayed refund for returns claiming the ACTC. The IRS can’t issue refunds before Page 111 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 14 Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents 109 --- Page 112 --- mid- February 2025 for returns that properly claim the ACTC. This time frame applies to the entire refund, not just the portion associated with the ACTC. Introduction The CTC is a credit that may reduce your tax by as much as $2,000 for each child who qualifies you for the credit. See Limits on the CTC and ODC , later. The ACTC is a credit you may be able to take if you are not able to claim the full amount of the CTC. The ODC is a credit that may reduce your tax by as much as $500 for each eligible de- pendent. The CTC and the ACTC shouldn’t be confused with the child and dependent care credit discussed in Pub. 503. Useful Items Y ou may want to see: Form (and Instructions) Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) Credits for Qualifying Children and Other Dependents 8862 Information T o Claim Certain Credits After Disallowance For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/ Forms . Taxpayer Identification Number Requirements You must have a TIN by the due date of your return. If you, or your spouse if filing jointly, don’t have an SSN or ITIN issued on or before the due date of your 2024 return (including ex- tensions), you can’t claim the CTC, ODC, or ACTC on either your original or amended 2024 tax return. If you apply for an ITIN on or before the due date of your 2024 return (including extensions) and the IRS issues you an ITIN as a result of the application, the IRS will consider your ITIN as issued on or before the due date of your return. Each qualifying child you use for CTC or ACTC must have the required SSN. If you have a qualifying child who doesn’t have the re- quired SSN, you can’t use the child to claim the CTC or ACTC on either your original or amen- ded 2024 tax return. The required SSN is one that is valid for employment and is issued be- fore the due date of your 2024 return (including extensions). If your qualifying child was born and died in 2024 and you don’t have an SSN for the child, attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate, death certificate, or hospital records. The docu- ment must show the child was born alive. If your qualifying child doesn’t have the re- quired SSN but has another type of TIN issued on or before the due date of your 2024 return (including extensions), you may be able to claim the ODC for that child. See Credit for Other De- pendents (ODC) , later. CAUTION! Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) 8862Each dependent you use for the ODC must have a TIN by the due date of your return. If you have a dependent who doesn’t have an SSN, ITIN, or ATIN issued on or before the due date of your 2024 return (including extensions), you can’t use that dependent to claim the ODC on either your original or amended 2024 tax re- turn. If you apply for an ITIN or ATIN for the de- pendent on or before the due date of your 2024 return (including extensions) and the IRS issues the ITIN or ATIN as a result of the application, the IRS will consider the ITIN or ATIN as issued on or before the due date of your return. Improper Claims If you erroneously claim the CTC, ACTC, or ODC, and it is later determined that your error was due to reckless or intentional disregard of the CTC, ACTC, or ODC rules, you will not be allowed to claim any of these credits for 2 years. If it is determined that your error was due to fraud, you will not be allowed to claim any of these credits for 10 years. Y ou may also have to pay penalties. See How to appeal the disallow- ance period in the Instructions for Form 8862, for more information about what to do if you dis- agree with our determination that you can’t claim the credit for 2 or 10 years. Form 8862 may be required. If your CTC (re- fundable or nonrefundable depending on the tax year), ACTC, or ODC for a year after 2015 was denied or reduced for any reason other than a math or clerical error, you must attach Form 8862 to your tax return to claim the CTC, ACTC, or ODC, unless an exception applies. See Form 8862, and its instructions for more in- formation, including whether an exception ap- plies. Child Tax Credit (CTC) The CTC is for individuals who claim a child as a dependent if the child meets additional condi- tions (described later). Note. This credit is different from and in ad- dition to the credit for child and dependent care expenses and the earned income credit that you may also be eligible to claim. The maximum amount you can claim for the credit is $2,000 for each child who qualifies you for the CTC. But, see Limits on the CTC and ODC , later. For more information about claiming the CTC, see Claiming the CTC and ODC , later. Qualifying Child for the CTC A child qualifies you for the CTC if the child meets all of the following conditions. 1.The child is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, or a de- scendant of any of them (for example, your grandchild, niece, or nephew). 2.The child was under age 17 at the end of 2024.3.The child didn’t provide over half the child’s own support for 2024. 4.The child lived with you for more than half of 2024 (see Exceptions to time lived with you, later). 5.The child is claimed as a dependent on your return. See chapter 3 for more infor- mation about claiming someone as a de- pendent. 6.The child doesn’t file a joint return for the year (or files it only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid). 7.The child was a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, or U.S. resident alien. For more informa- tion, see Pub. 519. If the child was adop- ted, see Adopted child , later. Example. Y our child turned 17 on Decem- ber 30, 2024, and is a citizen of the United States and claimed as a dependent on your re- turn. Y ou can't use the child to claim the CTC or ACTC because the child was not under age 17 at the end of 2024. If your child is age 17 or older at the end of 2024, see Credit for Other De- pendents (ODC) , later. Adopted child. An adopted child is always treated as your own child. An adopted child in- cludes a child lawfully placed with you for legal adoption. If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted child lived with you all year as a member of your household in 2024, that child meets condition 7, earlier, to be a qualifying child for the child tax credit (or condition 3, later, to be a qualifying person for the ODC). Exceptions to time lived with you. A child is considered to have lived with you for more than half of 2024 if the child was born or died in 2024 and your home was this child's home for more than half the time the child was alive. T emporary absences by you or the child for special circum- stances, such as school, vacation, business, medical care, military service, or detention in a juvenile facility, count as time the child lived with you. There are also exceptions for kidnapped children and children of divorced or separated parents. For details, see Residency T est in chapter 3. Qualifying child of more than one person. A special rule applies if your qualifying child is the qualifying child of more than one person. For details, see Qualifying Child of More Than One Person in chapter 3. Required SSN In addition to being a qualifying child for the CTC, your child must have the required SSN. The required SSN is one that is valid for em- ployment and that is issued by the Social Se- curity Administration (SSA) before the due date of your 2024 return (including extensions). If your qualifying child does not have the required SSN, see Credit for Other Dependents (ODC) , later. TIP TIPPage 112 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 110 Chapter 14 Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 113 --- If your child was a U.S. citizen when the child received the SSN, the SSN is valid for em- ployment. If “Not Valid for Employment” is prin- ted on your child’s social security card and your child’s immigration status has changed so that your child is now a U.S. citizen or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new social security card without the legend. However, if “Valid for Work Only With DHS Authorization” is printed on your child’s social security card, your child has the required SSN only as long as the De- partment of Homeland Security (DHS) authori- zation is valid. If your child doesn’t have the required SSN, you can't use the child to claim the CTC or ACTC on either your original or amended 2024 tax return. Credit for Other Dependents (ODC) This credit is for individuals with a dependent who meets additional conditions (described later). Note. This credit is different from and in ad- dition to the credit for child and dependent care expenses that you may also be eligible to claim. The maximum amount you can claim for this credit is $500 for each qualifying dependent. See Limits on the CTC and ODC , later. For more information about claiming the ODC, see Claiming the CTC and ODC , later. Qualifying Person for the ODC A person qualifies you for the ODC if the person meets all of the following conditions. 1.The person is claimed as a dependent on your return. See chapter 3 for more infor- mation about claiming someone as a de- pendent. 2.The person can’t be used by you to claim the CTC or ACTC. See Child T ax Credit (CTC) , earlier. 3.The person was a U.S. citizen, U.S. na- tional, or U.S. resident alien. For more in- formation, see Pub. 519. If the person is your adopted child, see Adopted child , earlier.Example. Y our sibling’s 10 -year- old child lives in Mexico and qualifies as your dependent. The child is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, or U.S. resident alien. Y ou can't use this depend- ent to claim the ODC. Y ou can’t use the same child to claim the CTC or ACTC, and the ODC. Timely Issued TIN In addition to being a qualifying person for the ODC, the person must have an SSN, ITIN, or ATIN issued to the dependent on or before the due date of your 2024 return (including exten- sions). If the person has not been issued an SSN, ITIN, or ATIN by that date, you can’t use the person to claim the ODC on either your orig- inal or amended 2024 return. For more informa- tion, see T axpayer Identification Number Re- quirements , earlier. Limits on the CTC and ODC The credit amount of your CTC or ODC may be reduced if your modified adjusted gross income (AGI) is more than the amounts shown below for your filing status. •Married filing jointly — $400,000. •All other filing statuses — $200,000. Modified AGI. For purposes of the CTC and ODC, your modified AGI is the amount on line 3 of Schedule 8812. For more information about limits on the CTC and ODC, see the Instructions for Sched- ule 8812 (Form 1040). Claiming the CTC and ODC T o claim the CTC or ODC, be sure you meet the following requirements. •Y ou must file Form 1040, 1040-SR, or 1040-NR and include the name and TIN of each dependent for whom you are claiming the CTC or ODC. •Y ou must file Schedule 8812 (Form 1040). CAUTION!•Y ou must file Form 8862, if applicable. See Improper Claims , earlier. •Y ou must enter a timely issued TIN on your tax return for you and your spouse (if filing jointly). See T axpayer Identification Num- ber Requirements , earlier. •For each qualifying child under 17 for whom you are claiming the CTC, you must enter the required SSN for the child in col- umn (2) of the Dependents section of your tax return and check the Child tax credit box in column (4). See Child T ax Credit (CTC) , earlier. •For each dependent for whom you are claiming the ODC, you must enter the timely issued TIN for the dependent in col- umn (2) of the Dependents section of your tax return and check the Credit for other dependents box in column (4). See Credit for Other Dependents (ODC) , earlier. Don't check both the Child tax credit box and the Credit for other depend- ents box for the same person. Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC) This credit is for certain individuals who get less than the full amount of the CTC. The ODC can’t be used to figure the ACTC. Only your CTC can be used to figure your ACTC. If you are claiming the ODC but not the CTC, you can’t claim the ACTC. Foreign earned income. If you file Form 2555 (relating to foreign earned income), you can’t claim the ACTC. Bona fide residents of Puerto Rico. Bona fide residents of Puerto Rico are no longer re- quired to have three or more qualifying children to be eligible to claim the ACTC. See Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) and its instructions. How to claim the ACTC. T o claim the ACTC, see Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) and its instruc- tions. CAUTION! CAUTION!Page 113 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Publication 17 (2024) Chapter 14 Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents 111 --- Page 114 --- Page 114 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table CAUTION!See the instructions for line 16 to see if you must use the T ax T able below to figure your tax. At LeastBut Less ThanSingle Married /f_iling jointly*Marr ied /f_iling sepa- ratelyHead of a house- hold Your tax is— 25,200 25,250 25,300 25,3502,795 2,801 2,807 2,813Sample Table 25,250 25,300 25,350 25,4002,563 2,569 2,5812,795 2,801 2,807 2,8132,696 2,702 2,708 2,7142,575 Example. A married couple are filing a joint return. Their taxable income on Form 1040, line 15, is $25,300. First, they find the $25,300 -25,350 taxable income line. Next, they find the column for married filing jointly and read down the column. The amount shown where the taxable income line and filing status column meet is $2,575. This is the tax amount they should enter in the entry space on Form 1040, line 16. If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 0 5 0 0 0 0 5 15 1 1 1 1 15 25 2 2 2 2 25 50 4 4 4 4 50 75 6 6 6 6 75 100 9 9 9 9 100 125 11 11 11 11 125 150 14 14 14 14 150 175 16 16 16 16 175 200 19 19 19 19 200 225 21 21 21 21 225 250 24 24 24 24 250 275 26 26 26 26 275 300 29 29 29 29 300 325 31 31 31 31 325 350 34 34 34 34 350 375 36 36 36 36 375 400 39 39 39 39 400 425 41 41 41 41 425 450 44 44 44 44 450 475 46 46 46 46 475 500 49 49 49 49 500 525 51 51 51 51 525 550 54 54 54 54 550 575 56 56 56 56 575 600 59 59 59 59 600 625 61 61 61 61 625 650 64 64 64 64 650 675 66 66 66 66 675 700 69 69 69 69 700 725 71 71 71 71 725 750 74 74 74 74 750 775 76 76 76 76 775 800 79 79 79 79 800 825 81 81 81 81 825 850 84 84 84 84 850 875 86 86 86 86 875 900 89 89 89 89 900 925 91 91 91 91 925 950 94 94 94 94 950 975 96 96 96 96 975 1,000 99 99 99 99If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 1,000 1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101 1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104 1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106 1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109 1,100 1,125 111 111 111 111 1,125 1,150 114 114 114 114 1,150 1,175 116 116 116 116 1,175 1,200 119 119 119 119 1,200 1,225 121 121 121 121 1,225 1,250 124 124 124 124 1,250 1,275 126 126 126 126 1,275 1,300 129 129 129 129 1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131 1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134 1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136 1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139 1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141 1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144 1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146 1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149 1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151 1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154 1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156 1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159 1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161 1,625 1,650 164 164 164 164 1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166 1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169 1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171 1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174 1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176 1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179 1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181 1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184 1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186 1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189 1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191 1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194 1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196 1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 2,000 2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201 2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204 2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206 2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209 2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211 2,125 2,150 214 214 214 214 2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216 2,175 2,200 219 219 219 219 2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221 2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224 2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226 2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229 2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231 2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234 2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236 2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239 2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241 2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244 2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246 2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249 2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251 2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254 2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256 2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259 2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261 2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264 2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266 2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269 2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271 2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274 2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276 2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279 2,800 2,825 281 281 281 281 2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284 2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286 2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289 2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291 2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294 2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296 2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. 112 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 115 --- Page 115 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 3,000 3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303 3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308 3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313 3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318 3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323 3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328 3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333 3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338 3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343 3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348 3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353 3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358 3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363 3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368 3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373 3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378 3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383 3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388 3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393 3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398 4,000 4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403 4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408 4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413 4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418 4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423 4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428 4,300 4,350 433 433 433 433 4,350 4,400 438 438 438 438 4,400 4,450 443 443 443 443 4,450 4,500 448 448 448 448 4,500 4,550 453 453 453 453 4,550 4,600 458 458 458 458 4,600 4,650 463 463 463 463 4,650 4,700 468 468 468 468 4,700 4,750 473 473 473 473 4,750 4,800 478 478 478 478 4,800 4,850 483 483 483 483 4,850 4,900 488 488 488 488 4,900 4,950 493 493 493 493 4,950 5,000 498 498 498 498 5,000 5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503 5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508 5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513 5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518 5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523 5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528 5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533 5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538 5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543 5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548 5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553 5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558 5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563 5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568 5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573 5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578 5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583 5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588 5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593 5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 6,000 6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603 6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608 6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613 6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618 6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623 6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628 6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633 6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638 6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643 6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648 6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653 6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658 6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663 6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668 6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673 6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678 6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683 6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688 6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693 6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698 7,000 7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703 7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708 7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713 7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718 7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723 7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728 7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733 7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738 7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743 7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748 7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753 7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758 7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763 7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768 7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773 7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778 7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783 7,850 7,900 788 788 788 788 7,900 7,950 793 793 793 793 7,950 8,000 798 798 798 798 8,000 8,000 8,050 803 803 803 803 8,050 8,100 808 808 808 808 8,100 8,150 813 813 813 813 8,150 8,200 818 818 818 818 8,200 8,250 823 823 823 823 8,250 8,300 828 828 828 828 8,300 8,350 833 833 833 833 8,350 8,400 838 838 838 838 8,400 8,450 843 843 843 843 8,450 8,500 848 848 848 848 8,500 8,550 853 853 853 853 8,550 8,600 858 858 858 858 8,600 8,650 863 863 863 863 8,650 8,700 868 868 868 868 8,700 8,750 873 873 873 873 8,750 8,800 878 878 878 878 8,800 8,850 883 883 883 883 8,850 8,900 888 888 888 888 8,900 8,950 893 893 893 893 8,950 9,000 898 898 898 898If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 9,000 9,000 9,050 903 903 903 903 9,050 9,100 908 908 908 908 9,100 9,150 913 913 913 913 9,150 9,200 918 918 918 918 9,200 9,250 923 923 923 923 9,250 9,300 928 928 928 928 9,300 9,350 933 933 933 933 9,350 9,400 938 938 938 938 9,400 9,450 943 943 943 943 9,450 9,500 948 948 948 948 9,500 9,550 953 953 953 953 9,550 9,600 958 958 958 958 9,600 9,650 963 963 963 963 9,650 9,700 968 968 968 968 9,700 9,750 973 973 973 973 9,750 9,800 978 978 978 978 9,800 9,850 983 983 983 983 9,850 9,900 988 988 988 988 9,900 9,950 993 993 993 993 9,950 10,000 998 998 998 998 10,000 10,000 10,050 1,003 1,003 1,003 1,003 10,050 10,100 1,008 1,008 1,008 1,008 10,100 10,150 1,013 1,013 1,013 1,013 10,150 10,200 1,018 1,018 1,018 1,018 10,200 10,250 1,023 1,023 1,023 1,023 10,250 10,300 1,028 1,028 1,028 1,028 10,300 10,350 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033 10,350 10,400 1,038 1,038 1,038 1,038 10,400 10,450 1,043 1,043 1,043 1,043 10,450 10,500 1,048 1,048 1,048 1,048 10,500 10,550 1,053 1,053 1,053 1,053 10,550 10,600 1,058 1,058 1,058 1,058 10,600 10,650 1,063 1,063 1,063 1,063 10,650 10,700 1,068 1,068 1,068 1,068 10,700 10,750 1,073 1,073 1,073 1,073 10,750 10,800 1,078 1,078 1,078 1,078 10,800 10,850 1,083 1,083 1,083 1,083 10,850 10,900 1,088 1,088 1,088 1,088 10,900 10,950 1,093 1,093 1,093 1,093 10,950 11,000 1,098 1,098 1,098 1,098 11,000 11,000 11,050 1,103 1,103 1,103 1,103 11,050 11,100 1,108 1,108 1,108 1,108 11,100 11,150 1,113 1,113 1,113 1,113 11,150 11,200 1,118 1,118 1,118 1,118 11,200 11,250 1,123 1,123 1,123 1,123 11,250 11,300 1,128 1,128 1,128 1,128 11,300 11,350 1,133 1,133 1,133 1,133 11,350 11,400 1,138 1,138 1,138 1,138 11,400 11,450 1,143 1,143 1,143 1,143 11,450 11,500 1,148 1,148 1,148 1,148 11,500 11,550 1,153 1,153 1,153 1,153 11,550 11,600 1,158 1,158 1,158 1,158 11,600 11,650 1,163 1,163 1,163 1,163 11,650 11,700 1,169 1,168 1,169 1,168 11,700 11,750 1,175 1,173 1,175 1,173 11,750 11,800 1,181 1,178 1,181 1,178 11,800 11,850 1,187 1,183 1,187 1,183 11,850 11,900 1,193 1,188 1,193 1,188 11,900 11,950 1,199 1,193 1,199 1,193 11,950 12,000 1,205 1,198 1,205 1,198 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. Publication 17 (2024) 113 --- Page 116 --- Page 116 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 12,000 12,000 12,050 1,211 1,203 1,211 1,203 12,050 12,100 1,217 1,208 1,217 1,208 12,100 12,150 1,223 1,213 1,223 1,213 12,150 12,200 1,229 1,218 1,229 1,218 12,200 12,250 1,235 1,223 1,235 1,223 12,250 12,300 1,241 1,228 1,241 1,228 12,300 12,350 1,247 1,233 1,247 1,233 12,350 12,400 1,253 1,238 1,253 1,238 12,400 12,450 1,259 1,243 1,259 1,243 12,450 12,500 1,265 1,248 1,265 1,248 12,500 12,550 1,271 1,253 1,271 1,253 12,550 12,600 1,277 1,258 1,277 1,258 12,600 12,650 1,283 1,263 1,283 1,263 12,650 12,700 1,289 1,268 1,289 1,268 12,700 12,750 1,295 1,273 1,295 1,273 12,750 12,800 1,301 1,278 1,301 1,278 12,800 12,850 1,307 1,283 1,307 1,283 12,850 12,900 1,313 1,288 1,313 1,288 12,900 12,950 1,319 1,293 1,319 1,293 12,950 13,000 1,325 1,298 1,325 1,298 13,000 13,000 13,050 1,331 1,303 1,331 1,303 13,050 13,100 1,337 1,308 1,337 1,308 13,100 13,150 1,343 1,313 1,343 1,313 13,150 13,200 1,349 1,318 1,349 1,318 13,200 13,250 1,355 1,323 1,355 1,323 13,250 13,300 1,361 1,328 1,361 1,328 13,300 13,350 1,367 1,333 1,367 1,333 13,350 13,400 1,373 1,338 1,373 1,338 13,400 13,450 1,379 1,343 1,379 1,343 13,450 13,500 1,385 1,348 1,385 1,348 13,500 13,550 1,391 1,353 1,391 1,353 13,550 13,600 1,397 1,358 1,397 1,358 13,600 13,650 1,403 1,363 1,403 1,363 13,650 13,700 1,409 1,368 1,409 1,368 13,700 13,750 1,415 1,373 1,415 1,373 13,750 13,800 1,421 1,378 1,421 1,378 13,800 13,850 1,427 1,383 1,427 1,383 13,850 13,900 1,433 1,388 1,433 1,388 13,900 13,950 1,439 1,393 1,439 1,393 13,950 14,000 1,445 1,398 1,445 1,398 14,000 14,000 14,050 1,451 1,403 1,451 1,403 14,050 14,100 1,457 1,408 1,457 1,408 14,100 14,150 1,463 1,413 1,463 1,413 14,150 14,200 1,469 1,418 1,469 1,418 14,200 14,250 1,475 1,423 1,475 1,423 14,250 14,300 1,481 1,428 1,481 1,428 14,300 14,350 1,487 1,433 1,487 1,433 14,350 14,400 1,493 1,438 1,493 1,438 14,400 14,450 1,499 1,443 1,499 1,443 14,450 14,500 1,505 1,448 1,505 1,448 14,500 14,550 1,511 1,453 1,511 1,453 14,550 14,600 1,517 1,458 1,517 1,458 14,600 14,650 1,523 1,463 1,523 1,463 14,650 14,700 1,529 1,468 1,529 1,468 14,700 14,750 1,535 1,473 1,535 1,473 14,750 14,800 1,541 1,478 1,541 1,478 14,800 14,850 1,547 1,483 1,547 1,483 14,850 14,900 1,553 1,488 1,553 1,488 14,900 14,950 1,559 1,493 1,559 1,493 14,950 15,000 1,565 1,498 1,565 1,498If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 15,000 15,000 15,050 1,571 1,503 1,571 1,503 15,050 15,100 1,577 1,508 1,577 1,508 15,100 15,150 1,583 1,513 1,583 1,513 15,150 15,200 1,589 1,518 1,589 1,518 15,200 15,250 1,595 1,523 1,595 1,523 15,250 15,300 1,601 1,528 1,601 1,528 15,300 15,350 1,607 1,533 1,607 1,533 15,350 15,400 1,613 1,538 1,613 1,538 15,400 15,450 1,619 1,543 1,619 1,543 15,450 15,500 1,625 1,548 1,625 1,548 15,500 15,550 1,631 1,553 1,631 1,553 15,550 15,600 1,637 1,558 1,637 1,558 15,600 15,650 1,643 1,563 1,643 1,563 15,650 15,700 1,649 1,568 1,649 1,568 15,700 15,750 1,655 1,573 1,655 1,573 15,750 15,800 1,661 1,578 1,661 1,578 15,800 15,850 1,667 1,583 1,667 1,583 15,850 15,900 1,673 1,588 1,673 1,588 15,900 15,950 1,679 1,593 1,679 1,593 15,950 16,000 1,685 1,598 1,685 1,598 16,000 16,000 16,050 1,691 1,603 1,691 1,603 16,050 16,100 1,697 1,608 1,697 1,608 16,100 16,150 1,703 1,613 1,703 1,613 16,150 16,200 1,709 1,618 1,709 1,618 16,200 16,250 1,715 1,623 1,715 1,623 16,250 16,300 1,721 1,628 1,721 1,628 16,300 16,350 1,727 1,633 1,727 1,633 16,350 16,400 1,733 1,638 1,733 1,638 16,400 16,450 1,739 1,643 1,739 1,643 16,450 16,500 1,745 1,648 1,745 1,648 16,500 16,550 1,751 1,653 1,751 1,653 16,550 16,600 1,757 1,658 1,757 1,658 16,600 16,650 1,763 1,663 1,763 1,664 16,650 16,700 1,769 1,668 1,769 1,670 16,700 16,750 1,775 1,673 1,775 1,676 16,750 16,800 1,781 1,678 1,781 1,682 16,800 16,850 1,787 1,683 1,787 1,688 16,850 16,900 1,793 1,688 1,793 1,694 16,900 16,950 1,799 1,693 1,799 1,700 16,950 17,000 1,805 1,698 1,805 1,706 17,000 17,000 17,050 1,811 1,703 1,811 1,712 17,050 17,100 1,817 1,708 1,817 1,718 17,100 17,150 1,823 1,713 1,823 1,724 17,150 17,200 1,829 1,718 1,829 1,730 17,200 17,250 1,835 1,723 1,835 1,736 17,250 17,300 1,841 1,728 1,841 1,742 17,300 17,350 1,847 1,733 1,847 1,748 17,350 17,400 1,853 1,738 1,853 1,754 17,400 17,450 1,859 1,743 1,859 1,760 17,450 17,500 1,865 1,748 1,865 1,766 17,500 17,550 1,871 1,753 1,871 1,772 17,550 17,600 1,877 1,758 1,877 1,778 17,600 17,650 1,883 1,763 1,883 1,784 17,650 17,700 1,889 1,768 1,889 1,790 17,700 17,750 1,895 1,773 1,895 1,796 17,750 17,800 1,901 1,778 1,901 1,802 17,800 17,850 1,907 1,783 1,907 1,808 17,850 17,900 1,913 1,788 1,913 1,814 17,900 17,950 1,919 1,793 1,919 1,820 17,950 18,000 1,925 1,798 1,925 1,826If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 18,000 18,000 18,050 1,931 1,803 1,931 1,832 18,050 18,100 1,937 1,808 1,937 1,838 18,100 18,150 1,943 1,813 1,943 1,844 18,150 18,200 1,949 1,818 1,949 1,850 18,200 18,250 1,955 1,823 1,955 1,856 18,250 18,300 1,961 1,828 1,961 1,862 18,300 18,350 1,967 1,833 1,967 1,868 18,350 18,400 1,973 1,838 1,973 1,874 18,400 18,450 1,979 1,843 1,979 1,880 18,450 18,500 1,985 1,848 1,985 1,886 18,500 18,550 1,991 1,853 1,991 1,892 18,550 18,600 1,997 1,858 1,997 1,898 18,600 18,650 2,003 1,863 2,003 1,904 18,650 18,700 2,009 1,868 2,009 1,910 18,700 18,750 2,015 1,873 2,015 1,916 18,750 18,800 2,021 1,878 2,021 1,922 18,800 18,850 2,027 1,883 2,027 1,928 18,850 18,900 2,033 1,888 2,033 1,934 18,900 18,950 2,039 1,893 2,039 1,940 18,950 19,000 2,045 1,898 2,045 1,946 19,000 19,000 19,050 2,051 1,903 2,051 1,952 19,050 19,100 2,057 1,908 2,057 1,958 19,100 19,150 2,063 1,913 2,063 1,964 19,150 19,200 2,069 1,918 2,069 1,970 19,200 19,250 2,075 1,923 2,075 1,976 19,250 19,300 2,081 1,928 2,081 1,982 19,300 19,350 2,087 1,933 2,087 1,988 19,350 19,400 2,093 1,938 2,093 1,994 19,400 19,450 2,099 1,943 2,099 2,000 19,450 19,500 2,105 1,948 2,105 2,006 19,500 19,550 2,111 1,953 2,111 2,012 19,550 19,600 2,117 1,958 2,117 2,018 19,600 19,650 2,123 1,963 2,123 2,024 19,650 19,700 2,129 1,968 2,129 2,030 19,700 19,750 2,135 1,973 2,135 2,036 19,750 19,800 2,141 1,978 2,141 2,042 19,800 19,850 2,147 1,983 2,147 2,048 19,850 19,900 2,153 1,988 2,153 2,054 19,900 19,950 2,159 1,993 2,159 2,060 19,950 20,000 2,165 1,998 2,165 2,066 20,000 20,000 20,050 2,171 2,003 2,171 2,072 20,050 20,100 2,177 2,008 2,177 2,078 20,100 20,150 2,183 2,013 2,183 2,084 20,150 20,200 2,189 2,018 2,189 2,090 20,200 20,250 2,195 2,023 2,195 2,096 20,250 20,300 2,201 2,028 2,201 2,102 20,300 20,350 2,207 2,033 2,207 2,108 20,350 20,400 2,213 2,038 2,213 2,114 20,400 20,450 2,219 2,043 2,219 2,120 20,450 20,500 2,225 2,048 2,225 2,126 20,500 20,550 2,231 2,053 2,231 2,132 20,550 20,600 2,237 2,058 2,237 2,138 20,600 20,650 2,243 2,063 2,243 2,144 20,650 20,700 2,249 2,068 2,249 2,150 20,700 20,750 2,255 2,073 2,255 2,156 20,750 20,800 2,261 2,078 2,261 2,162 20,800 20,850 2,267 2,083 2,267 2,168 20,850 20,900 2,273 2,088 2,273 2,174 20,900 20,950 2,279 2,093 2,279 2,180 20,950 21,000 2,285 2,098 2,285 2,186 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. 114 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 117 --- Page 117 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 21,000 21,000 21,050 2,291 2,103 2,291 2,192 21,050 21,100 2,297 2,108 2,297 2,198 21,100 21,150 2,303 2,113 2,303 2,204 21,150 21,200 2,309 2,118 2,309 2,210 21,200 21,250 2,315 2,123 2,315 2,216 21,250 21,300 2,321 2,128 2,321 2,222 21,300 21,350 2,327 2,133 2,327 2,228 21,350 21,400 2,333 2,138 2,333 2,234 21,400 21,450 2,339 2,143 2,339 2,240 21,450 21,500 2,345 2,148 2,345 2,246 21,500 21,550 2,351 2,153 2,351 2,252 21,550 21,600 2,357 2,158 2,357 2,258 21,600 21,650 2,363 2,163 2,363 2,264 21,650 21,700 2,369 2,168 2,369 2,270 21,700 21,750 2,375 2,173 2,375 2,276 21,750 21,800 2,381 2,178 2,381 2,282 21,800 21,850 2,387 2,183 2,387 2,288 21,850 21,900 2,393 2,188 2,393 2,294 21,900 21,950 2,399 2,193 2,399 2,300 21,950 22,000 2,405 2,198 2,405 2,306 22,000 22,000 22,050 2,411 2,203 2,411 2,312 22,050 22,100 2,417 2,208 2,417 2,318 22,100 22,150 2,423 2,213 2,423 2,324 22,150 22,200 2,429 2,218 2,429 2,330 22,200 22,250 2,435 2,223 2,435 2,336 22,250 22,300 2,441 2,228 2,441 2,342 22,300 22,350 2,447 2,233 2,447 2,348 22,350 22,400 2,453 2,238 2,453 2,354 22,400 22,450 2,459 2,243 2,459 2,360 22,450 22,500 2,465 2,248 2,465 2,366 22,500 22,550 2,471 2,253 2,471 2,372 22,550 22,600 2,477 2,258 2,477 2,378 22,600 22,650 2,483 2,263 2,483 2,384 22,650 22,700 2,489 2,268 2,489 2,390 22,700 22,750 2,495 2,273 2,495 2,396 22,750 22,800 2,501 2,278 2,501 2,402 22,800 22,850 2,507 2,283 2,507 2,408 22,850 22,900 2,513 2,288 2,513 2,414 22,900 22,950 2,519 2,293 2,519 2,420 22,950 23,000 2,525 2,298 2,525 2,426 23,000 23,000 23,050 2,531 2,303 2,531 2,432 23,050 23,100 2,537 2,308 2,537 2,438 23,100 23,150 2,543 2,313 2,543 2,444 23,150 23,200 2,549 2,318 2,549 2,450 23,200 23,250 2,555 2,323 2,555 2,456 23,250 23,300 2,561 2,329 2,561 2,462 23,300 23,350 2,567 2,335 2,567 2,468 23,350 23,400 2,573 2,341 2,573 2,474 23,400 23,450 2,579 2,347 2,579 2,480 23,450 23,500 2,585 2,353 2,585 2,486 23,500 23,550 2,591 2,359 2,591 2,492 23,550 23,600 2,597 2,365 2,597 2,498 23,600 23,650 2,603 2,371 2,603 2,504 23,650 23,700 2,609 2,377 2,609 2,510 23,700 23,750 2,615 2,383 2,615 2,516 23,750 23,800 2,621 2,389 2,621 2,522 23,800 23,850 2,627 2,395 2,627 2,528 23,850 23,900 2,633 2,401 2,633 2,534 23,900 23,950 2,639 2,407 2,639 2,540 23,950 24,000 2,645 2,413 2,645 2,546If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 24,000 24,000 24,050 2,651 2,419 2,651 2,552 24,050 24,100 2,657 2,425 2,657 2,558 24,100 24,150 2,663 2,431 2,663 2,564 24,150 24,200 2,669 2,437 2,669 2,570 24,200 24,250 2,675 2,443 2,675 2,576 24,250 24,300 2,681 2,449 2,681 2,582 24,300 24,350 2,687 2,455 2,687 2,588 24,350 24,400 2,693 2,461 2,693 2,594 24,400 24,450 2,699 2,467 2,699 2,600 24,450 24,500 2,705 2,473 2,705 2,606 24,500 24,550 2,711 2,479 2,711 2,612 24,550 24,600 2,717 2,485 2,717 2,618 24,600 24,650 2,723 2,491 2,723 2,624 24,650 24,700 2,729 2,497 2,729 2,630 24,700 24,750 2,735 2,503 2,735 2,636 24,750 24,800 2,741 2,509 2,741 2,642 24,800 24,850 2,747 2,515 2,747 2,648 24,850 24,900 2,753 2,521 2,753 2,654 24,900 24,950 2,759 2,527 2,759 2,660 24,950 25,000 2,765 2,533 2,765 2,666 25,000 25,000 25,050 2,771 2,539 2,771 2,672 25,050 25,100 2,777 2,545 2,777 2,678 25,100 25,150 2,783 2,551 2,783 2,684 25,150 25,200 2,789 2,557 2,789 2,690 25,200 25,250 2,795 2,563 2,795 2,696 25,250 25,300 2,801 2,569 2,801 2,702 25,300 25,350 2,807 2,575 2,807 2,708 25,350 25,400 2,813 2,581 2,813 2,714 25,400 25,450 2,819 2,587 2,819 2,720 25,450 25,500 2,825 2,593 2,825 2,726 25,500 25,550 2,831 2,599 2,831 2,732 25,550 25,600 2,837 2,605 2,837 2,738 25,600 25,650 2,843 2,611 2,843 2,744 25,650 25,700 2,849 2,617 2,849 2,750 25,700 25,750 2,855 2,623 2,855 2,756 25,750 25,800 2,861 2,629 2,861 2,762 25,800 25,850 2,867 2,635 2,867 2,768 25,850 25,900 2,873 2,641 2,873 2,774 25,900 25,950 2,879 2,647 2,879 2,780 25,950 26,000 2,885 2,653 2,885 2,786 26,000 26,000 26,050 2,891 2,659 2,891 2,792 26,050 26,100 2,897 2,665 2,897 2,798 26,100 26,150 2,903 2,671 2,903 2,804 26,150 26,200 2,909 2,677 2,909 2,810 26,200 26,250 2,915 2,683 2,915 2,816 26,250 26,300 2,921 2,689 2,921 2,822 26,300 26,350 2,927 2,695 2,927 2,828 26,350 26,400 2,933 2,701 2,933 2,834 26,400 26,450 2,939 2,707 2,939 2,840 26,450 26,500 2,945 2,713 2,945 2,846 26,500 26,550 2,951 2,719 2,951 2,852 26,550 26,600 2,957 2,725 2,957 2,858 26,600 26,650 2,963 2,731 2,963 2,864 26,650 26,700 2,969 2,737 2,969 2,870 26,700 26,750 2,975 2,743 2,975 2,876 26,750 26,800 2,981 2,749 2,981 2,882 26,800 26,850 2,987 2,755 2,987 2,888 26,850 26,900 2,993 2,761 2,993 2,894 26,900 26,950 2,999 2,767 2,999 2,900 26,950 27,000 3,005 2,773 3,005 2,906If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 27,000 27,000 27,050 3,011 2,779 3,011 2,912 27,050 27,100 3,017 2,785 3,017 2,918 27,100 27,150 3,023 2,791 3,023 2,924 27,150 27,200 3,029 2,797 3,029 2,930 27,200 27,250 3,035 2,803 3,035 2,936 27,250 27,300 3,041 2,809 3,041 2,942 27,300 27,350 3,047 2,815 3,047 2,948 27,350 27,400 3,053 2,821 3,053 2,954 27,400 27,450 3,059 2,827 3,059 2,960 27,450 27,500 3,065 2,833 3,065 2,966 27,500 27,550 3,071 2,839 3,071 2,972 27,550 27,600 3,077 2,845 3,077 2,978 27,600 27,650 3,083 2,851 3,083 2,984 27,650 27,700 3,089 2,857 3,089 2,990 27,700 27,750 3,095 2,863 3,095 2,996 27,750 27,800 3,101 2,869 3,101 3,002 27,800 27,850 3,107 2,875 3,107 3,008 27,850 27,900 3,113 2,881 3,113 3,014 27,900 27,950 3,119 2,887 3,119 3,020 27,950 28,000 3,125 2,893 3,125 3,026 28,000 28,000 28,050 3,131 2,899 3,131 3,032 28,050 28,100 3,137 2,905 3,137 3,038 28,100 28,150 3,143 2,911 3,143 3,044 28,150 28,200 3,149 2,917 3,149 3,050 28,200 28,250 3,155 2,923 3,155 3,056 28,250 28,300 3,161 2,929 3,161 3,062 28,300 28,350 3,167 2,935 3,167 3,068 28,350 28,400 3,173 2,941 3,173 3,074 28,400 28,450 3,179 2,947 3,179 3,080 28,450 28,500 3,185 2,953 3,185 3,086 28,500 28,550 3,191 2,959 3,191 3,092 28,550 28,600 3,197 2,965 3,197 3,098 28,600 28,650 3,203 2,971 3,203 3,104 28,650 28,700 3,209 2,977 3,209 3,110 28,700 28,750 3,215 2,983 3,215 3,116 28,750 28,800 3,221 2,989 3,221 3,122 28,800 28,850 3,227 2,995 3,227 3,128 28,850 28,900 3,233 3,001 3,233 3,134 28,900 28,950 3,239 3,007 3,239 3,140 28,950 29,000 3,245 3,013 3,245 3,146 29,000 29,000 29,050 3,251 3,019 3,251 3,152 29,050 29,100 3,257 3,025 3,257 3,158 29,100 29,150 3,263 3,031 3,263 3,164 29,150 29,200 3,269 3,037 3,269 3,170 29,200 29,250 3,275 3,043 3,275 3,176 29,250 29,300 3,281 3,049 3,281 3,182 29,300 29,350 3,287 3,055 3,287 3,188 29,350 29,400 3,293 3,061 3,293 3,194 29,400 29,450 3,299 3,067 3,299 3,200 29,450 29,500 3,305 3,073 3,305 3,206 29,500 29,550 3,311 3,079 3,311 3,212 29,550 29,600 3,317 3,085 3,317 3,218 29,600 29,650 3,323 3,091 3,323 3,224 29,650 29,700 3,329 3,097 3,329 3,230 29,700 29,750 3,335 3,103 3,335 3,236 29,750 29,800 3,341 3,109 3,341 3,242 29,800 29,850 3,347 3,115 3,347 3,248 29,850 29,900 3,353 3,121 3,353 3,254 29,900 29,950 3,359 3,127 3,359 3,260 29,950 30,000 3,365 3,133 3,365 3,266 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. Publication 17 (2024) 115 --- Page 118 --- Page 118 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 30,000 30,000 30,050 3,371 3,139 3,371 3,272 30,050 30,100 3,377 3,145 3,377 3,278 30,100 30,150 3,383 3,151 3,383 3,284 30,150 30,200 3,389 3,157 3,389 3,290 30,200 30,250 3,395 3,163 3,395 3,296 30,250 30,300 3,401 3,169 3,401 3,302 30,300 30,350 3,407 3,175 3,407 3,308 30,350 30,400 3,413 3,181 3,413 3,314 30,400 30,450 3,419 3,187 3,419 3,320 30,450 30,500 3,425 3,193 3,425 3,326 30,500 30,550 3,431 3,199 3,431 3,332 30,550 30,600 3,437 3,205 3,437 3,338 30,600 30,650 3,443 3,211 3,443 3,344 30,650 30,700 3,449 3,217 3,449 3,350 30,700 30,750 3,455 3,223 3,455 3,356 30,750 30,800 3,461 3,229 3,461 3,362 30,800 30,850 3,467 3,235 3,467 3,368 30,850 30,900 3,473 3,241 3,473 3,374 30,900 30,950 3,479 3,247 3,479 3,380 30,950 31,000 3,485 3,253 3,485 3,386 31,000 31,000 31,050 3,491 3,259 3,491 3,392 31,050 31,100 3,497 3,265 3,497 3,398 31,100 31,150 3,503 3,271 3,503 3,404 31,150 31,200 3,509 3,277 3,509 3,410 31,200 31,250 3,515 3,283 3,515 3,416 31,250 31,300 3,521 3,289 3,521 3,422 31,300 31,350 3,527 3,295 3,527 3,428 31,350 31,400 3,533 3,301 3,533 3,434 31,400 31,450 3,539 3,307 3,539 3,440 31,450 31,500 3,545 3,313 3,545 3,446 31,500 31,550 3,551 3,319 3,551 3,452 31,550 31,600 3,557 3,325 3,557 3,458 31,600 31,650 3,563 3,331 3,563 3,464 31,650 31,700 3,569 3,337 3,569 3,470 31,700 31,750 3,575 3,343 3,575 3,476 31,750 31,800 3,581 3,349 3,581 3,482 31,800 31,850 3,587 3,355 3,587 3,488 31,850 31,900 3,593 3,361 3,593 3,494 31,900 31,950 3,599 3,367 3,599 3,500 31,950 32,000 3,605 3,373 3,605 3,506 32,000 32,000 32,050 3,611 3,379 3,611 3,512 32,050 32,100 3,617 3,385 3,617 3,518 32,100 32,150 3,623 3,391 3,623 3,524 32,150 32,200 3,629 3,397 3,629 3,530 32,200 32,250 3,635 3,403 3,635 3,536 32,250 32,300 3,641 3,409 3,641 3,542 32,300 32,350 3,647 3,415 3,647 3,548 32,350 32,400 3,653 3,421 3,653 3,554 32,400 32,450 3,659 3,427 3,659 3,560 32,450 32,500 3,665 3,433 3,665 3,566 32,500 32,550 3,671 3,439 3,671 3,572 32,550 32,600 3,677 3,445 3,677 3,578 32,600 32,650 3,683 3,451 3,683 3,584 32,650 32,700 3,689 3,457 3,689 3,590 32,700 32,750 3,695 3,463 3,695 3,596 32,750 32,800 3,701 3,469 3,701 3,602 32,800 32,850 3,707 3,475 3,707 3,608 32,850 32,900 3,713 3,481 3,713 3,614 32,900 32,950 3,719 3,487 3,719 3,620 32,950 33,000 3,725 3,493 3,725 3,626If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 33,000 33,000 33,050 3,731 3,499 3,731 3,632 33,050 33,100 3,737 3,505 3,737 3,638 33,100 33,150 3,743 3,511 3,743 3,644 33,150 33,200 3,749 3,517 3,749 3,650 33,200 33,250 3,755 3,523 3,755 3,656 33,250 33,300 3,761 3,529 3,761 3,662 33,300 33,350 3,767 3,535 3,767 3,668 33,350 33,400 3,773 3,541 3,773 3,674 33,400 33,450 3,779 3,547 3,779 3,680 33,450 33,500 3,785 3,553 3,785 3,686 33,500 33,550 3,791 3,559 3,791 3,692 33,550 33,600 3,797 3,565 3,797 3,698 33,600 33,650 3,803 3,571 3,803 3,704 33,650 33,700 3,809 3,577 3,809 3,710 33,700 33,750 3,815 3,583 3,815 3,716 33,750 33,800 3,821 3,589 3,821 3,722 33,800 33,850 3,827 3,595 3,827 3,728 33,850 33,900 3,833 3,601 3,833 3,734 33,900 33,950 3,839 3,607 3,839 3,740 33,950 34,000 3,845 3,613 3,845 3,746 34,000 34,000 34,050 3,851 3,619 3,851 3,752 34,050 34,100 3,857 3,625 3,857 3,758 34,100 34,150 3,863 3,631 3,863 3,764 34,150 34,200 3,869 3,637 3,869 3,770 34,200 34,250 3,875 3,643 3,875 3,776 34,250 34,300 3,881 3,649 3,881 3,782 34,300 34,350 3,887 3,655 3,887 3,788 34,350 34,400 3,893 3,661 3,893 3,794 34,400 34,450 3,899 3,667 3,899 3,800 34,450 34,500 3,905 3,673 3,905 3,806 34,500 34,550 3,911 3,679 3,911 3,812 34,550 34,600 3,917 3,685 3,917 3,818 34,600 34,650 3,923 3,691 3,923 3,824 34,650 34,700 3,929 3,697 3,929 3,830 34,700 34,750 3,935 3,703 3,935 3,836 34,750 34,800 3,941 3,709 3,941 3,842 34,800 34,850 3,947 3,715 3,947 3,848 34,850 34,900 3,953 3,721 3,953 3,854 34,900 34,950 3,959 3,727 3,959 3,860 34,950 35,000 3,965 3,733 3,965 3,866 35,000 35,000 35,050 3,971 3,739 3,971 3,872 35,050 35,100 3,977 3,745 3,977 3,878 35,100 35,150 3,983 3,751 3,983 3,884 35,150 35,200 3,989 3,757 3,989 3,890 35,200 35,250 3,995 3,763 3,995 3,896 35,250 35,300 4,001 3,769 4,001 3,902 35,300 35,350 4,007 3,775 4,007 3,908 35,350 35,400 4,013 3,781 4,013 3,914 35,400 35,450 4,019 3,787 4,019 3,920 35,450 35,500 4,025 3,793 4,025 3,926 35,500 35,550 4,031 3,799 4,031 3,932 35,550 35,600 4,037 3,805 4,037 3,938 35,600 35,650 4,043 3,811 4,043 3,944 35,650 35,700 4,049 3,817 4,049 3,950 35,700 35,750 4,055 3,823 4,055 3,956 35,750 35,800 4,061 3,829 4,061 3,962 35,800 35,850 4,067 3,835 4,067 3,968 35,850 35,900 4,073 3,841 4,073 3,974 35,900 35,950 4,079 3,847 4,079 3,980 35,950 36,000 4,085 3,853 4,085 3,986If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 36,000 36,000 36,050 4,091 3,859 4,091 3,992 36,050 36,100 4,097 3,865 4,097 3,998 36,100 36,150 4,103 3,871 4,103 4,004 36,150 36,200 4,109 3,877 4,109 4,010 36,200 36,250 4,115 3,883 4,115 4,016 36,250 36,300 4,121 3,889 4,121 4,022 36,300 36,350 4,127 3,895 4,127 4,028 36,350 36,400 4,133 3,901 4,133 4,034 36,400 36,450 4,139 3,907 4,139 4,040 36,450 36,500 4,145 3,913 4,145 4,046 36,500 36,550 4,151 3,919 4,151 4,052 36,550 36,600 4,157 3,925 4,157 4,058 36,600 36,650 4,163 3,931 4,163 4,064 36,650 36,700 4,169 3,937 4,169 4,070 36,700 36,750 4,175 3,943 4,175 4,076 36,750 36,800 4,181 3,949 4,181 4,082 36,800 36,850 4,187 3,955 4,187 4,088 36,850 36,900 4,193 3,961 4,193 4,094 36,900 36,950 4,199 3,967 4,199 4,100 36,950 37,000 4,205 3,973 4,205 4,106 37,000 37,000 37,050 4,211 3,979 4,211 4,112 37,050 37,100 4,217 3,985 4,217 4,118 37,100 37,150 4,223 3,991 4,223 4,124 37,150 37,200 4,229 3,997 4,229 4,130 37,200 37,250 4,235 4,003 4,235 4,136 37,250 37,300 4,241 4,009 4,241 4,142 37,300 37,350 4,247 4,015 4,247 4,148 37,350 37,400 4,253 4,021 4,253 4,154 37,400 37,450 4,259 4,027 4,259 4,160 37,450 37,500 4,265 4,033 4,265 4,166 37,500 37,550 4,271 4,039 4,271 4,172 37,550 37,600 4,277 4,045 4,277 4,178 37,600 37,650 4,283 4,051 4,283 4,184 37,650 37,700 4,289 4,057 4,289 4,190 37,700 37,750 4,295 4,063 4,295 4,196 37,750 37,800 4,301 4,069 4,301 4,202 37,800 37,850 4,307 4,075 4,307 4,208 37,850 37,900 4,313 4,081 4,313 4,214 37,900 37,950 4,319 4,087 4,319 4,220 37,950 38,000 4,325 4,093 4,325 4,226 38,000 38,000 38,050 4,331 4,099 4,331 4,232 38,050 38,100 4,337 4,105 4,337 4,238 38,100 38,150 4,343 4,111 4,343 4,244 38,150 38,200 4,349 4,117 4,349 4,250 38,200 38,250 4,355 4,123 4,355 4,256 38,250 38,300 4,361 4,129 4,361 4,262 38,300 38,350 4,367 4,135 4,367 4,268 38,350 38,400 4,373 4,141 4,373 4,274 38,400 38,450 4,379 4,147 4,379 4,280 38,450 38,500 4,385 4,153 4,385 4,286 38,500 38,550 4,391 4,159 4,391 4,292 38,550 38,600 4,397 4,165 4,397 4,298 38,600 38,650 4,403 4,171 4,403 4,304 38,650 38,700 4,409 4,177 4,409 4,310 38,700 38,750 4,415 4,183 4,415 4,316 38,750 38,800 4,421 4,189 4,421 4,322 38,800 38,850 4,427 4,195 4,427 4,328 38,850 38,900 4,433 4,201 4,433 4,334 38,900 38,950 4,439 4,207 4,439 4,340 38,950 39,000 4,445 4,213 4,445 4,346 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. 116 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 119 --- Page 119 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 39,000 39,000 39,050 4,451 4,219 4,451 4,352 39,050 39,100 4,457 4,225 4,457 4,358 39,100 39,150 4,463 4,231 4,463 4,364 39,150 39,200 4,469 4,237 4,469 4,370 39,200 39,250 4,475 4,243 4,475 4,376 39,250 39,300 4,481 4,249 4,481 4,382 39,300 39,350 4,487 4,255 4,487 4,388 39,350 39,400 4,493 4,261 4,493 4,394 39,400 39,450 4,499 4,267 4,499 4,400 39,450 39,500 4,505 4,273 4,505 4,406 39,500 39,550 4,511 4,279 4,511 4,412 39,550 39,600 4,517 4,285 4,517 4,418 39,600 39,650 4,523 4,291 4,523 4,424 39,650 39,700 4,529 4,297 4,529 4,430 39,700 39,750 4,535 4,303 4,535 4,436 39,750 39,800 4,541 4,309 4,541 4,442 39,800 39,850 4,547 4,315 4,547 4,448 39,850 39,900 4,553 4,321 4,553 4,454 39,900 39,950 4,559 4,327 4,559 4,460 39,950 40,000 4,565 4,333 4,565 4,466 40,000 40,000 40,050 4,571 4,339 4,571 4,472 40,050 40,100 4,577 4,345 4,577 4,478 40,100 40,150 4,583 4,351 4,583 4,484 40,150 40,200 4,589 4,357 4,589 4,490 40,200 40,250 4,595 4,363 4,595 4,496 40,250 40,300 4,601 4,369 4,601 4,502 40,300 40,350 4,607 4,375 4,607 4,508 40,350 40,400 4,613 4,381 4,613 4,514 40,400 40,450 4,619 4,387 4,619 4,520 40,450 40,500 4,625 4,393 4,625 4,526 40,500 40,550 4,631 4,399 4,631 4,532 40,550 40,600 4,637 4,405 4,637 4,538 40,600 40,650 4,643 4,411 4,643 4,544 40,650 40,700 4,649 4,417 4,649 4,550 40,700 40,750 4,655 4,423 4,655 4,556 40,750 40,800 4,661 4,429 4,661 4,562 40,800 40,850 4,667 4,435 4,667 4,568 40,850 40,900 4,673 4,441 4,673 4,574 40,900 40,950 4,679 4,447 4,679 4,580 40,950 41,000 4,685 4,453 4,685 4,586 41,000 41,000 41,050 4,691 4,459 4,691 4,592 41,050 41,100 4,697 4,465 4,697 4,598 41,100 41,150 4,703 4,471 4,703 4,604 41,150 41,200 4,709 4,477 4,709 4,610 41,200 41,250 4,715 4,483 4,715 4,616 41,250 41,300 4,721 4,489 4,721 4,622 41,300 41,350 4,727 4,495 4,727 4,628 41,350 41,400 4,733 4,501 4,733 4,634 41,400 41,450 4,739 4,507 4,739 4,640 41,450 41,500 4,745 4,513 4,745 4,646 41,500 41,550 4,751 4,519 4,751 4,652 41,550 41,600 4,757 4,525 4,757 4,658 41,600 41,650 4,763 4,531 4,763 4,664 41,650 41,700 4,769 4,537 4,769 4,670 41,700 41,750 4,775 4,543 4,775 4,676 41,750 41,800 4,781 4,549 4,781 4,682 41,800 41,850 4,787 4,555 4,787 4,688 41,850 41,900 4,793 4,561 4,793 4,694 41,900 41,950 4,799 4,567 4,799 4,700 41,950 42,000 4,805 4,573 4,805 4,706If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 42,000 42,000 42,050 4,811 4,579 4,811 4,712 42,050 42,100 4,817 4,585 4,817 4,718 42,100 42,150 4,823 4,591 4,823 4,724 42,150 42,200 4,829 4,597 4,829 4,730 42,200 42,250 4,835 4,603 4,835 4,736 42,250 42,300 4,841 4,609 4,841 4,742 42,300 42,350 4,847 4,615 4,847 4,748 42,350 42,400 4,853 4,621 4,853 4,754 42,400 42,450 4,859 4,627 4,859 4,760 42,450 42,500 4,865 4,633 4,865 4,766 42,500 42,550 4,871 4,639 4,871 4,772 42,550 42,600 4,877 4,645 4,877 4,778 42,600 42,650 4,883 4,651 4,883 4,784 42,650 42,700 4,889 4,657 4,889 4,790 42,700 42,750 4,895 4,663 4,895 4,796 42,750 42,800 4,901 4,669 4,901 4,802 42,800 42,850 4,907 4,675 4,907 4,808 42,850 42,900 4,913 4,681 4,913 4,814 42,900 42,950 4,919 4,687 4,919 4,820 42,950 43,000 4,925 4,693 4,925 4,826 43,000 43,000 43,050 4,931 4,699 4,931 4,832 43,050 43,100 4,937 4,705 4,937 4,838 43,100 43,150 4,943 4,711 4,943 4,844 43,150 43,200 4,949 4,717 4,949 4,850 43,200 43,250 4,955 4,723 4,955 4,856 43,250 43,300 4,961 4,729 4,961 4,862 43,300 43,350 4,967 4,735 4,967 4,868 43,350 43,400 4,973 4,741 4,973 4,874 43,400 43,450 4,979 4,747 4,979 4,880 43,450 43,500 4,985 4,753 4,985 4,886 43,500 43,550 4,991 4,759 4,991 4,892 43,550 43,600 4,997 4,765 4,997 4,898 43,600 43,650 5,003 4,771 5,003 4,904 43,650 43,700 5,009 4,777 5,009 4,910 43,700 43,750 5,015 4,783 5,015 4,916 43,750 43,800 5,021 4,789 5,021 4,922 43,800 43,850 5,027 4,795 5,027 4,928 43,850 43,900 5,033 4,801 5,033 4,934 43,900 43,950 5,039 4,807 5,039 4,940 43,950 44,000 5,045 4,813 5,045 4,946 44,000 44,000 44,050 5,051 4,819 5,051 4,952 44,050 44,100 5,057 4,825 5,057 4,958 44,100 44,150 5,063 4,831 5,063 4,964 44,150 44,200 5,069 4,837 5,069 4,970 44,200 44,250 5,075 4,843 5,075 4,976 44,250 44,300 5,081 4,849 5,081 4,982 44,300 44,350 5,087 4,855 5,087 4,988 44,350 44,400 5,093 4,861 5,093 4,994 44,400 44,450 5,099 4,867 5,099 5,000 44,450 44,500 5,105 4,873 5,105 5,006 44,500 44,550 5,111 4,879 5,111 5,012 44,550 44,600 5,117 4,885 5,117 5,018 44,600 44,650 5,123 4,891 5,123 5,024 44,650 44,700 5,129 4,897 5,129 5,030 44,700 44,750 5,135 4,903 5,135 5,036 44,750 44,800 5,141 4,909 5,141 5,042 44,800 44,850 5,147 4,915 5,147 5,048 44,850 44,900 5,153 4,921 5,153 5,054 44,900 44,950 5,159 4,927 5,159 5,060 44,950 45,000 5,165 4,933 5,165 5,066If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 45,000 45,000 45,050 5,171 4,939 5,171 5,072 45,050 45,100 5,177 4,945 5,177 5,078 45,100 45,150 5,183 4,951 5,183 5,084 45,150 45,200 5,189 4,957 5,189 5,090 45,200 45,250 5,195 4,963 5,195 5,096 45,250 45,300 5,201 4,969 5,201 5,102 45,300 45,350 5,207 4,975 5,207 5,108 45,350 45,400 5,213 4,981 5,213 5,114 45,400 45,450 5,219 4,987 5,219 5,120 45,450 45,500 5,225 4,993 5,225 5,126 45,500 45,550 5,231 4,999 5,231 5,132 45,550 45,600 5,237 5,005 5,237 5,138 45,600 45,650 5,243 5,011 5,243 5,144 45,650 45,700 5,249 5,017 5,249 5,150 45,700 45,750 5,255 5,023 5,255 5,156 45,750 45,800 5,261 5,029 5,261 5,162 45,800 45,850 5,267 5,035 5,267 5,168 45,850 45,900 5,273 5,041 5,273 5,174 45,900 45,950 5,279 5,047 5,279 5,180 45,950 46,000 5,285 5,053 5,285 5,186 46,000 46,000 46,050 5,291 5,059 5,291 5,192 46,050 46,100 5,297 5,065 5,297 5,198 46,100 46,150 5,303 5,071 5,303 5,204 46,150 46,200 5,309 5,077 5,309 5,210 46,200 46,250 5,315 5,083 5,315 5,216 46,250 46,300 5,321 5,089 5,321 5,222 46,300 46,350 5,327 5,095 5,327 5,228 46,350 46,400 5,333 5,101 5,333 5,234 46,400 46,450 5,339 5,107 5,339 5,240 46,450 46,500 5,345 5,113 5,345 5,246 46,500 46,550 5,351 5,119 5,351 5,252 46,550 46,600 5,357 5,125 5,357 5,258 46,600 46,650 5,363 5,131 5,363 5,264 46,650 46,700 5,369 5,137 5,369 5,270 46,700 46,750 5,375 5,143 5,375 5,276 46,750 46,800 5,381 5,149 5,381 5,282 46,800 46,850 5,387 5,155 5,387 5,288 46,850 46,900 5,393 5,161 5,393 5,294 46,900 46,950 5,399 5,167 5,399 5,300 46,950 47,000 5,405 5,173 5,405 5,306 47,000 47,000 47,050 5,411 5,179 5,411 5,312 47,050 47,100 5,417 5,185 5,417 5,318 47,100 47,150 5,423 5,191 5,423 5,324 47,150 47,200 5,432 5,197 5,432 5,330 47,200 47,250 5,443 5,203 5,443 5,336 47,250 47,300 5,454 5,209 5,454 5,342 47,300 47,350 5,465 5,215 5,465 5,348 47,350 47,400 5,476 5,221 5,476 5,354 47,400 47,450 5,487 5,227 5,487 5,360 47,450 47,500 5,498 5,233 5,498 5,366 47,500 47,550 5,509 5,239 5,509 5,372 47,550 47,600 5,520 5,245 5,520 5,378 47,600 47,650 5,531 5,251 5,531 5,384 47,650 47,700 5,542 5,257 5,542 5,390 47,700 47,750 5,553 5,263 5,553 5,396 47,750 47,800 5,564 5,269 5,564 5,402 47,800 47,850 5,575 5,275 5,575 5,408 47,850 47,900 5,586 5,281 5,586 5,414 47,900 47,950 5,597 5,287 5,597 5,420 47,950 48,000 5,608 5,293 5,608 5,426 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. Publication 17 (2024) 117 --- Page 120 --- Page 120 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 48,000 48,000 48,050 5,619 5,299 5,619 5,432 48,050 48,100 5,630 5,305 5,630 5,438 48,100 48,150 5,641 5,311 5,641 5,444 48,150 48,200 5,652 5,317 5,652 5,450 48,200 48,250 5,663 5,323 5,663 5,456 48,250 48,300 5,674 5,329 5,674 5,462 48,300 48,350 5,685 5,335 5,685 5,468 48,350 48,400 5,696 5,341 5,696 5,474 48,400 48,450 5,707 5,347 5,707 5,480 48,450 48,500 5,718 5,353 5,718 5,486 48,500 48,550 5,729 5,359 5,729 5,492 48,550 48,600 5,740 5,365 5,740 5,498 48,600 48,650 5,751 5,371 5,751 5,504 48,650 48,700 5,762 5,377 5,762 5,510 48,700 48,750 5,773 5,383 5,773 5,516 48,750 48,800 5,784 5,389 5,784 5,522 48,800 48,850 5,795 5,395 5,795 5,528 48,850 48,900 5,806 5,401 5,806 5,534 48,900 48,950 5,817 5,407 5,817 5,540 48,950 49,000 5,828 5,413 5,828 5,546 49,000 49,000 49,050 5,839 5,419 5,839 5,552 49,050 49,100 5,850 5,425 5,850 5,558 49,100 49,150 5,861 5,431 5,861 5,564 49,150 49,200 5,872 5,437 5,872 5,570 49,200 49,250 5,883 5,443 5,883 5,576 49,250 49,300 5,894 5,449 5,894 5,582 49,300 49,350 5,905 5,455 5,905 5,588 49,350 49,400 5,916 5,461 5,916 5,594 49,400 49,450 5,927 5,467 5,927 5,600 49,450 49,500 5,938 5,473 5,938 5,606 49,500 49,550 5,949 5,479 5,949 5,612 49,550 49,600 5,960 5,485 5,960 5,618 49,600 49,650 5,971 5,491 5,971 5,624 49,650 49,700 5,982 5,497 5,982 5,630 49,700 49,750 5,993 5,503 5,993 5,636 49,750 49,800 6,004 5,509 6,004 5,642 49,800 49,850 6,015 5,515 6,015 5,648 49,850 49,900 6,026 5,521 6,026 5,654 49,900 49,950 6,037 5,527 6,037 5,660 49,950 50,000 6,048 5,533 6,048 5,666 50,000 50,000 50,050 6,059 5,539 6,059 5,672 50,050 50,100 6,070 5,545 6,070 5,678 50,100 50,150 6,081 5,551 6,081 5,684 50,150 50,200 6,092 5,557 6,092 5,690 50,200 50,250 6,103 5,563 6,103 5,696 50,250 50,300 6,114 5,569 6,114 5,702 50,300 50,350 6,125 5,575 6,125 5,708 50,350 50,400 6,136 5,581 6,136 5,714 50,400 50,450 6,147 5,587 6,147 5,720 50,450 50,500 6,158 5,593 6,158 5,726 50,500 50,550 6,169 5,599 6,169 5,732 50,550 50,600 6,180 5,605 6,180 5,738 50,600 50,650 6,191 5,611 6,191 5,744 50,650 50,700 6,202 5,617 6,202 5,750 50,700 50,750 6,213 5,623 6,213 5,756 50,750 50,800 6,224 5,629 6,224 5,762 50,800 50,850 6,235 5,635 6,235 5,768 50,850 50,900 6,246 5,641 6,246 5,774 50,900 50,950 6,257 5,647 6,257 5,780 50,950 51,000 6,268 5,653 6,268 5,786If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 51,000 51,000 51,050 6,279 5,659 6,279 5,792 51,050 51,100 6,290 5,665 6,290 5,798 51,100 51,150 6,301 5,671 6,301 5,804 51,150 51,200 6,312 5,677 6,312 5,810 51,200 51,250 6,323 5,683 6,323 5,816 51,250 51,300 6,334 5,689 6,334 5,822 51,300 51,350 6,345 5,695 6,345 5,828 51,350 51,400 6,356 5,701 6,356 5,834 51,400 51,450 6,367 5,707 6,367 5,840 51,450 51,500 6,378 5,713 6,378 5,846 51,500 51,550 6,389 5,719 6,389 5,852 51,550 51,600 6,400 5,725 6,400 5,858 51,600 51,650 6,411 5,731 6,411 5,864 51,650 51,700 6,422 5,737 6,422 5,870 51,700 51,750 6,433 5,743 6,433 5,876 51,750 51,800 6,444 5,749 6,444 5,882 51,800 51,850 6,455 5,755 6,455 5,888 51,850 51,900 6,466 5,761 6,466 5,894 51,900 51,950 6,477 5,767 6,477 5,900 51,950 52,000 6,488 5,773 6,488 5,906 52,000 52,000 52,050 6,499 5,779 6,499 5,912 52,050 52,100 6,510 5,785 6,510 5,918 52,100 52,150 6,521 5,791 6,521 5,924 52,150 52,200 6,532 5,797 6,532 5,930 52,200 52,250 6,543 5,803 6,543 5,936 52,250 52,300 6,554 5,809 6,554 5,942 52,300 52,350 6,565 5,815 6,565 5,948 52,350 52,400 6,576 5,821 6,576 5,954 52,400 52,450 6,587 5,827 6,587 5,960 52,450 52,500 6,598 5,833 6,598 5,966 52,500 52,550 6,609 5,839 6,609 5,972 52,550 52,600 6,620 5,845 6,620 5,978 52,600 52,650 6,631 5,851 6,631 5,984 52,650 52,700 6,642 5,857 6,642 5,990 52,700 52,750 6,653 5,863 6,653 5,996 52,750 52,800 6,664 5,869 6,664 6,002 52,800 52,850 6,675 5,875 6,675 6,008 52,850 52,900 6,686 5,881 6,686 6,014 52,900 52,950 6,697 5,887 6,697 6,020 52,950 53,000 6,708 5,893 6,708 6,026 53,000 53,000 53,050 6,719 5,899 6,719 6,032 53,050 53,100 6,730 5,905 6,730 6,038 53,100 53,150 6,741 5,911 6,741 6,044 53,150 53,200 6,752 5,917 6,752 6,050 53,200 53,250 6,763 5,923 6,763 6,056 53,250 53,300 6,774 5,929 6,774 6,062 53,300 53,350 6,785 5,935 6,785 6,068 53,350 53,400 6,796 5,941 6,796 6,074 53,400 53,450 6,807 5,947 6,807 6,080 53,450 53,500 6,818 5,953 6,818 6,086 53,500 53,550 6,829 5,959 6,829 6,092 53,550 53,600 6,840 5,965 6,840 6,098 53,600 53,650 6,851 5,971 6,851 6,104 53,650 53,700 6,862 5,977 6,862 6,110 53,700 53,750 6,873 5,983 6,873 6,116 53,750 53,800 6,884 5,989 6,884 6,122 53,800 53,850 6,895 5,995 6,895 6,128 53,850 53,900 6,906 6,001 6,906 6,134 53,900 53,950 6,917 6,007 6,917 6,140 53,950 54,000 6,928 6,013 6,928 6,146If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 54,000 54,000 54,050 6,939 6,019 6,939 6,152 54,050 54,100 6,950 6,025 6,950 6,158 54,100 54,150 6,961 6,031 6,961 6,164 54,150 54,200 6,972 6,037 6,972 6,170 54,200 54,250 6,983 6,043 6,983 6,176 54,250 54,300 6,994 6,049 6,994 6,182 54,300 54,350 7,005 6,055 7,005 6,188 54,350 54,400 7,016 6,061 7,016 6,194 54,400 54,450 7,027 6,067 7,027 6,200 54,450 54,500 7,038 6,073 7,038 6,206 54,500 54,550 7,049 6,079 7,049 6,212 54,550 54,600 7,060 6,085 7,060 6,218 54,600 54,650 7,071 6,091 7,071 6,224 54,650 54,700 7,082 6,097 7,082 6,230 54,700 54,750 7,093 6,103 7,093 6,236 54,750 54,800 7,104 6,109 7,104 6,242 54,800 54,850 7,115 6,115 7,115 6,248 54,850 54,900 7,126 6,121 7,126 6,254 54,900 54,950 7,137 6,127 7,137 6,260 54,950 55,000 7,148 6,133 7,148 6,266 55,000 55,000 55,050 7,159 6,139 7,159 6,272 55,050 55,100 7,170 6,145 7,170 6,278 55,100 55,150 7,181 6,151 7,181 6,284 55,150 55,200 7,192 6,157 7,192 6,290 55,200 55,250 7,203 6,163 7,203 6,296 55,250 55,300 7,214 6,169 7,214 6,302 55,300 55,350 7,225 6,175 7,225 6,308 55,350 55,400 7,236 6,181 7,236 6,314 55,400 55,450 7,247 6,187 7,247 6,320 55,450 55,500 7,258 6,193 7,258 6,326 55,500 55,550 7,269 6,199 7,269 6,332 55,550 55,600 7,280 6,205 7,280 6,338 55,600 55,650 7,291 6,211 7,291 6,344 55,650 55,700 7,302 6,217 7,302 6,350 55,700 55,750 7,313 6,223 7,313 6,356 55,750 55,800 7,324 6,229 7,324 6,362 55,800 55,850 7,335 6,235 7,335 6,368 55,850 55,900 7,346 6,241 7,346 6,374 55,900 55,950 7,357 6,247 7,357 6,380 55,950 56,000 7,368 6,253 7,368 6,386 56,000 56,000 56,050 7,379 6,259 7,379 6,392 56,050 56,100 7,390 6,265 7,390 6,398 56,100 56,150 7,401 6,271 7,401 6,404 56,150 56,200 7,412 6,277 7,412 6,410 56,200 56,250 7,423 6,283 7,423 6,416 56,250 56,300 7,434 6,289 7,434 6,422 56,300 56,350 7,445 6,295 7,445 6,428 56,350 56,400 7,456 6,301 7,456 6,434 56,400 56,450 7,467 6,307 7,467 6,440 56,450 56,500 7,478 6,313 7,478 6,446 56,500 56,550 7,489 6,319 7,489 6,452 56,550 56,600 7,500 6,325 7,500 6,458 56,600 56,650 7,511 6,331 7,511 6,464 56,650 56,700 7,522 6,337 7,522 6,470 56,700 56,750 7,533 6,343 7,533 6,476 56,750 56,800 7,544 6,349 7,544 6,482 56,800 56,850 7,555 6,355 7,555 6,488 56,850 56,900 7,566 6,361 7,566 6,494 56,900 56,950 7,577 6,367 7,577 6,500 56,950 57,000 7,588 6,373 7,588 6,506 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. 118 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 121 --- Page 121 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 57,000 57,000 57,050 7,599 6,379 7,599 6,512 57,050 57,100 7,610 6,385 7,610 6,518 57,100 57,150 7,621 6,391 7,621 6,524 57,150 57,200 7,632 6,397 7,632 6,530 57,200 57,250 7,643 6,403 7,643 6,536 57,250 57,300 7,654 6,409 7,654 6,542 57,300 57,350 7,665 6,415 7,665 6,548 57,350 57,400 7,676 6,421 7,676 6,554 57,400 57,450 7,687 6,427 7,687 6,560 57,450 57,500 7,698 6,433 7,698 6,566 57,500 57,550 7,709 6,439 7,709 6,572 57,550 57,600 7,720 6,445 7,720 6,578 57,600 57,650 7,731 6,451 7,731 6,584 57,650 57,700 7,742 6,457 7,742 6,590 57,700 57,750 7,753 6,463 7,753 6,596 57,750 57,800 7,764 6,469 7,764 6,602 57,800 57,850 7,775 6,475 7,775 6,608 57,850 57,900 7,786 6,481 7,786 6,614 57,900 57,950 7,797 6,487 7,797 6,620 57,950 58,000 7,808 6,493 7,808 6,626 58,000 58,000 58,050 7,819 6,499 7,819 6,632 58,050 58,100 7,830 6,505 7,830 6,638 58,100 58,150 7,841 6,511 7,841 6,644 58,150 58,200 7,852 6,517 7,852 6,650 58,200 58,250 7,863 6,523 7,863 6,656 58,250 58,300 7,874 6,529 7,874 6,662 58,300 58,350 7,885 6,535 7,885 6,668 58,350 58,400 7,896 6,541 7,896 6,674 58,400 58,450 7,907 6,547 7,907 6,680 58,450 58,500 7,918 6,553 7,918 6,686 58,500 58,550 7,929 6,559 7,929 6,692 58,550 58,600 7,940 6,565 7,940 6,698 58,600 58,650 7,951 6,571 7,951 6,704 58,650 58,700 7,962 6,577 7,962 6,710 58,700 58,750 7,973 6,583 7,973 6,716 58,750 58,800 7,984 6,589 7,984 6,722 58,800 58,850 7,995 6,595 7,995 6,728 58,850 58,900 8,006 6,601 8,006 6,734 58,900 58,950 8,017 6,607 8,017 6,740 58,950 59,000 8,028 6,613 8,028 6,746 59,000 59,000 59,050 8,039 6,619 8,039 6,752 59,050 59,100 8,050 6,625 8,050 6,758 59,100 59,150 8,061 6,631 8,061 6,764 59,150 59,200 8,072 6,637 8,072 6,770 59,200 59,250 8,083 6,643 8,083 6,776 59,250 59,300 8,094 6,649 8,094 6,782 59,300 59,350 8,105 6,655 8,105 6,788 59,350 59,400 8,116 6,661 8,116 6,794 59,400 59,450 8,127 6,667 8,127 6,800 59,450 59,500 8,138 6,673 8,138 6,806 59,500 59,550 8,149 6,679 8,149 6,812 59,550 59,600 8,160 6,685 8,160 6,818 59,600 59,650 8,171 6,691 8,171 6,824 59,650 59,700 8,182 6,697 8,182 6,830 59,700 59,750 8,193 6,703 8,193 6,836 59,750 59,800 8,204 6,709 8,204 6,842 59,800 59,850 8,215 6,715 8,215 6,848 59,850 59,900 8,226 6,721 8,226 6,854 59,900 59,950 8,237 6,727 8,237 6,860 59,950 60,000 8,248 6,733 8,248 6,866If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 60,000 60,000 60,050 8,259 6,739 8,259 6,872 60,050 60,100 8,270 6,745 8,270 6,878 60,100 60,150 8,281 6,751 8,281 6,884 60,150 60,200 8,292 6,757 8,292 6,890 60,200 60,250 8,303 6,763 8,303 6,896 60,250 60,300 8,314 6,769 8,314 6,902 60,300 60,350 8,325 6,775 8,325 6,908 60,350 60,400 8,336 6,781 8,336 6,914 60,400 60,450 8,347 6,787 8,347 6,920 60,450 60,500 8,358 6,793 8,358 6,926 60,500 60,550 8,369 6,799 8,369 6,932 60,550 60,600 8,380 6,805 8,380 6,938 60,600 60,650 8,391 6,811 8,391 6,944 60,650 60,700 8,402 6,817 8,402 6,950 60,700 60,750 8,413 6,823 8,413 6,956 60,750 60,800 8,424 6,829 8,424 6,962 60,800 60,850 8,435 6,835 8,435 6,968 60,850 60,900 8,446 6,841 8,446 6,974 60,900 60,950 8,457 6,847 8,457 6,980 60,950 61,000 8,468 6,853 8,468 6,986 61,000 61,000 61,050 8,479 6,859 8,479 6,992 61,050 61,100 8,490 6,865 8,490 6,998 61,100 61,150 8,501 6,871 8,501 7,004 61,150 61,200 8,512 6,877 8,512 7,010 61,200 61,250 8,523 6,883 8,523 7,016 61,250 61,300 8,534 6,889 8,534 7,022 61,300 61,350 8,545 6,895 8,545 7,028 61,350 61,400 8,556 6,901 8,556 7,034 61,400 61,450 8,567 6,907 8,567 7,040 61,450 61,500 8,578 6,913 8,578 7,046 61,500 61,550 8,589 6,919 8,589 7,052 61,550 61,600 8,600 6,925 8,600 7,058 61,600 61,650 8,611 6,931 8,611 7,064 61,650 61,700 8,622 6,937 8,622 7,070 61,700 61,750 8,633 6,943 8,633 7,076 61,750 61,800 8,644 6,949 8,644 7,082 61,800 61,850 8,655 6,955 8,655 7,088 61,850 61,900 8,666 6,961 8,666 7,094 61,900 61,950 8,677 6,967 8,677 7,100 61,950 62,000 8,688 6,973 8,688 7,106 62,000 62,000 62,050 8,699 6,979 8,699 7,112 62,050 62,100 8,710 6,985 8,710 7,118 62,100 62,150 8,721 6,991 8,721 7,124 62,150 62,200 8,732 6,997 8,732 7,130 62,200 62,250 8,743 7,003 8,743 7,136 62,250 62,300 8,754 7,009 8,754 7,142 62,300 62,350 8,765 7,015 8,765 7,148 62,350 62,400 8,776 7,021 8,776 7,154 62,400 62,450 8,787 7,027 8,787 7,160 62,450 62,500 8,798 7,033 8,798 7,166 62,500 62,550 8,809 7,039 8,809 7,172 62,550 62,600 8,820 7,045 8,820 7,178 62,600 62,650 8,831 7,051 8,831 7,184 62,650 62,700 8,842 7,057 8,842 7,190 62,700 62,750 8,853 7,063 8,853 7,196 62,750 62,800 8,864 7,069 8,864 7,202 62,800 62,850 8,875 7,075 8,875 7,208 62,850 62,900 8,886 7,081 8,886 7,214 62,900 62,950 8,897 7,087 8,897 7,220 62,950 63,000 8,908 7,093 8,908 7,226If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 63,000 63,000 63,050 8,919 7,099 8,919 7,232 63,050 63,100 8,930 7,105 8,930 7,238 63,100 63,150 8,941 7,111 8,941 7,247 63,150 63,200 8,952 7,117 8,952 7,258 63,200 63,250 8,963 7,123 8,963 7,269 63,250 63,300 8,974 7,129 8,974 7,280 63,300 63,350 8,985 7,135 8,985 7,291 63,350 63,400 8,996 7,141 8,996 7,302 63,400 63,450 9,007 7,147 9,007 7,313 63,450 63,500 9,018 7,153 9,018 7,324 63,500 63,550 9,029 7,159 9,029 7,335 63,550 63,600 9,040 7,165 9,040 7,346 63,600 63,650 9,051 7,171 9,051 7,357 63,650 63,700 9,062 7,177 9,062 7,368 63,700 63,750 9,073 7,183 9,073 7,379 63,750 63,800 9,084 7,189 9,084 7,390 63,800 63,850 9,095 7,195 9,095 7,401 63,850 63,900 9,106 7,201 9,106 7,412 63,900 63,950 9,117 7,207 9,117 7,423 63,950 64,000 9,128 7,213 9,128 7,434 64,000 64,000 64,050 9,139 7,219 9,139 7,445 64,050 64,100 9,150 7,225 9,150 7,456 64,100 64,150 9,161 7,231 9,161 7,467 64,150 64,200 9,172 7,237 9,172 7,478 64,200 64,250 9,183 7,243 9,183 7,489 64,250 64,300 9,194 7,249 9,194 7,500 64,300 64,350 9,205 7,255 9,205 7,511 64,350 64,400 9,216 7,261 9,216 7,522 64,400 64,450 9,227 7,267 9,227 7,533 64,450 64,500 9,238 7,273 9,238 7,544 64,500 64,550 9,249 7,279 9,249 7,555 64,550 64,600 9,260 7,285 9,260 7,566 64,600 64,650 9,271 7,291 9,271 7,577 64,650 64,700 9,282 7,297 9,282 7,588 64,700 64,750 9,293 7,303 9,293 7,599 64,750 64,800 9,304 7,309 9,304 7,610 64,800 64,850 9,315 7,315 9,315 7,621 64,850 64,900 9,326 7,321 9,326 7,632 64,900 64,950 9,337 7,327 9,337 7,643 64,950 65,000 9,348 7,333 9,348 7,654 65,000 65,000 65,050 9,359 7,339 9,359 7,665 65,050 65,100 9,370 7,345 9,370 7,676 65,100 65,150 9,381 7,351 9,381 7,687 65,150 65,200 9,392 7,357 9,392 7,698 65,200 65,250 9,403 7,363 9,403 7,709 65,250 65,300 9,414 7,369 9,414 7,720 65,300 65,350 9,425 7,375 9,425 7,731 65,350 65,400 9,436 7,381 9,436 7,742 65,400 65,450 9,447 7,387 9,447 7,753 65,450 65,500 9,458 7,393 9,458 7,764 65,500 65,550 9,469 7,399 9,469 7,775 65,550 65,600 9,480 7,405 9,480 7,786 65,600 65,650 9,491 7,411 9,491 7,797 65,650 65,700 9,502 7,417 9,502 7,808 65,700 65,750 9,513 7,423 9,513 7,819 65,750 65,800 9,524 7,429 9,524 7,830 65,800 65,850 9,535 7,435 9,535 7,841 65,850 65,900 9,546 7,441 9,546 7,852 65,900 65,950 9,557 7,447 9,557 7,863 65,950 66,000 9,568 7,453 9,568 7,874 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. Publication 17 (2024) 119 --- Page 122 --- Page 122 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 66,000 66,000 66,050 9,579 7,459 9,579 7,885 66,050 66,100 9,590 7,465 9,590 7,896 66,100 66,150 9,601 7,471 9,601 7,907 66,150 66,200 9,612 7,477 9,612 7,918 66,200 66,250 9,623 7,483 9,623 7,929 66,250 66,300 9,634 7,489 9,634 7,940 66,300 66,350 9,645 7,495 9,645 7,951 66,350 66,400 9,656 7,501 9,656 7,962 66,400 66,450 9,667 7,507 9,667 7,973 66,450 66,500 9,678 7,513 9,678 7,984 66,500 66,550 9,689 7,519 9,689 7,995 66,550 66,600 9,700 7,525 9,700 8,006 66,600 66,650 9,711 7,531 9,711 8,017 66,650 66,700 9,722 7,537 9,722 8,028 66,700 66,750 9,733 7,543 9,733 8,039 66,750 66,800 9,744 7,549 9,744 8,050 66,800 66,850 9,755 7,555 9,755 8,061 66,850 66,900 9,766 7,561 9,766 8,072 66,900 66,950 9,777 7,567 9,777 8,083 66,950 67,000 9,788 7,573 9,788 8,094 67,000 67,000 67,050 9,799 7,579 9,799 8,105 67,050 67,100 9,810 7,585 9,810 8,116 67,100 67,150 9,821 7,591 9,821 8,127 67,150 67,200 9,832 7,597 9,832 8,138 67,200 67,250 9,843 7,603 9,843 8,149 67,250 67,300 9,854 7,609 9,854 8,160 67,300 67,350 9,865 7,615 9,865 8,171 67,350 67,400 9,876 7,621 9,876 8,182 67,400 67,450 9,887 7,627 9,887 8,193 67,450 67,500 9,898 7,633 9,898 8,204 67,500 67,550 9,909 7,639 9,909 8,215 67,550 67,600 9,920 7,645 9,920 8,226 67,600 67,650 9,931 7,651 9,931 8,237 67,650 67,700 9,942 7,657 9,942 8,248 67,700 67,750 9,953 7,663 9,953 8,259 67,750 67,800 9,964 7,669 9,964 8,270 67,800 67,850 9,975 7,675 9,975 8,281 67,850 67,900 9,986 7,681 9,986 8,292 67,900 67,950 9,997 7,687 9,997 8,303 67,950 68,000 10,008 7,693 10,008 8,314 68,000 68,000 68,050 10,019 7,699 10,019 8,325 68,050 68,100 10,030 7,705 10,030 8,336 68,100 68,150 10,041 7,711 10,041 8,347 68,150 68,200 10,052 7,717 10,052 8,358 68,200 68,250 10,063 7,723 10,063 8,369 68,250 68,300 10,074 7,729 10,074 8,380 68,300 68,350 10,085 7,735 10,085 8,391 68,350 68,400 10,096 7,741 10,096 8,402 68,400 68,450 10,107 7,747 10,107 8,413 68,450 68,500 10,118 7,753 10,118 8,424 68,500 68,550 10,129 7,759 10,129 8,435 68,550 68,600 10,140 7,765 10,140 8,446 68,600 68,650 10,151 7,771 10,151 8,457 68,650 68,700 10,162 7,777 10,162 8,468 68,700 68,750 10,173 7,783 10,173 8,479 68,750 68,800 10,184 7,789 10,184 8,490 68,800 68,850 10,195 7,795 10,195 8,501 68,850 68,900 10,206 7,801 10,206 8,512 68,900 68,950 10,217 7,807 10,217 8,523 68,950 69,000 10,228 7,813 10,228 8,534If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 69,000 69,000 69,050 10,239 7,819 10,239 8,545 69,050 69,100 10,250 7,825 10,250 8,556 69,100 69,150 10,261 7,831 10,261 8,567 69,150 69,200 10,272 7,837 10,272 8,578 69,200 69,250 10,283 7,843 10,283 8,589 69,250 69,300 10,294 7,849 10,294 8,600 69,300 69,350 10,305 7,855 10,305 8,611 69,350 69,400 10,316 7,861 10,316 8,622 69,400 69,450 10,327 7,867 10,327 8,633 69,450 69,500 10,338 7,873 10,338 8,644 69,500 69,550 10,349 7,879 10,349 8,655 69,550 69,600 10,360 7,885 10,360 8,666 69,600 69,650 10,371 7,891 10,371 8,677 69,650 69,700 10,382 7,897 10,382 8,688 69,700 69,750 10,393 7,903 10,393 8,699 69,750 69,800 10,404 7,909 10,404 8,710 69,800 69,850 10,415 7,915 10,415 8,721 69,850 69,900 10,426 7,921 10,426 8,732 69,900 69,950 10,437 7,927 10,437 8,743 69,950 70,000 10,448 7,933 10,448 8,754 70,000 70,000 70,050 10,459 7,939 10,459 8,765 70,050 70,100 10,470 7,945 10,470 8,776 70,100 70,150 10,481 7,951 10,481 8,787 70,150 70,200 10,492 7,957 10,492 8,798 70,200 70,250 10,503 7,963 10,503 8,809 70,250 70,300 10,514 7,969 10,514 8,820 70,300 70,350 10,525 7,975 10,525 8,831 70,350 70,400 10,536 7,981 10,536 8,842 70,400 70,450 10,547 7,987 10,547 8,853 70,450 70,500 10,558 7,993 10,558 8,864 70,500 70,550 10,569 7,999 10,569 8,875 70,550 70,600 10,580 8,005 10,580 8,886 70,600 70,650 10,591 8,011 10,591 8,897 70,650 70,700 10,602 8,017 10,602 8,908 70,700 70,750 10,613 8,023 10,613 8,919 70,750 70,800 10,624 8,029 10,624 8,930 70,800 70,850 10,635 8,035 10,635 8,941 70,850 70,900 10,646 8,041 10,646 8,952 70,900 70,950 10,657 8,047 10,657 8,963 70,950 71,000 10,668 8,053 10,668 8,974 71,000 71,000 71,050 10,679 8,059 10,679 8,985 71,050 71,100 10,690 8,065 10,690 8,996 71,100 71,150 10,701 8,071 10,701 9,007 71,150 71,200 10,712 8,077 10,712 9,018 71,200 71,250 10,723 8,083 10,723 9,029 71,250 71,300 10,734 8,089 10,734 9,040 71,300 71,350 10,745 8,095 10,745 9,051 71,350 71,400 10,756 8,101 10,756 9,062 71,400 71,450 10,767 8,107 10,767 9,073 71,450 71,500 10,778 8,113 10,778 9,084 71,500 71,550 10,789 8,119 10,789 9,095 71,550 71,600 10,800 8,125 10,800 9,106 71,600 71,650 10,811 8,131 10,811 9,117 71,650 71,700 10,822 8,137 10,822 9,128 71,700 71,750 10,833 8,143 10,833 9,139 71,750 71,800 10,844 8,149 10,844 9,150 71,800 71,850 10,855 8,155 10,855 9,161 71,850 71,900 10,866 8,161 10,866 9,172 71,900 71,950 10,877 8,167 10,877 9,183 71,950 72,000 10,888 8,173 10,888 9,194If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 72,000 72,000 72,050 10,899 8,179 10,899 9,205 72,050 72,100 10,910 8,185 10,910 9,216 72,100 72,150 10,921 8,191 10,921 9,227 72,150 72,200 10,932 8,197 10,932 9,238 72,200 72,250 10,943 8,203 10,943 9,249 72,250 72,300 10,954 8,209 10,954 9,260 72,300 72,350 10,965 8,215 10,965 9,271 72,350 72,400 10,976 8,221 10,976 9,282 72,400 72,450 10,987 8,227 10,987 9,293 72,450 72,500 10,998 8,233 10,998 9,304 72,500 72,550 11,009 8,239 11,009 9,315 72,550 72,600 11,020 8,245 11,020 9,326 72,600 72,650 11,031 8,251 11,031 9,337 72,650 72,700 11,042 8,257 11,042 9,348 72,700 72,750 11,053 8,263 11,053 9,359 72,750 72,800 11,064 8,269 11,064 9,370 72,800 72,850 11,075 8,275 11,075 9,381 72,850 72,900 11,086 8,281 11,086 9,392 72,900 72,950 11,097 8,287 11,097 9,403 72,950 73,000 11,108 8,293 11,108 9,414 73,000 73,000 73,050 11,119 8,299 11,119 9,425 73,050 73,100 11,130 8,305 11,130 9,436 73,100 73,150 11,141 8,311 11,141 9,447 73,150 73,200 11,152 8,317 11,152 9,458 73,200 73,250 11,163 8,323 11,163 9,469 73,250 73,300 11,174 8,329 11,174 9,480 73,300 73,350 11,185 8,335 11,185 9,491 73,350 73,400 11,196 8,341 11,196 9,502 73,400 73,450 11,207 8,347 11,207 9,513 73,450 73,500 11,218 8,353 11,218 9,524 73,500 73,550 11,229 8,359 11,229 9,535 73,550 73,600 11,240 8,365 11,240 9,546 73,600 73,650 11,251 8,371 11,251 9,557 73,650 73,700 11,262 8,377 11,262 9,568 73,700 73,750 11,273 8,383 11,273 9,579 73,750 73,800 11,284 8,389 11,284 9,590 73,800 73,850 11,295 8,395 11,295 9,601 73,850 73,900 11,306 8,401 11,306 9,612 73,900 73,950 11,317 8,407 11,317 9,623 73,950 74,000 11,328 8,413 11,328 9,634 74,000 74,000 74,050 11,339 8,419 11,339 9,645 74,050 74,100 11,350 8,425 11,350 9,656 74,100 74,150 11,361 8,431 11,361 9,667 74,150 74,200 11,372 8,437 11,372 9,678 74,200 74,250 11,383 8,443 11,383 9,689 74,250 74,300 11,394 8,449 11,394 9,700 74,300 74,350 11,405 8,455 11,405 9,711 74,350 74,400 11,416 8,461 11,416 9,722 74,400 74,450 11,427 8,467 11,427 9,733 74,450 74,500 11,438 8,473 11,438 9,744 74,500 74,550 11,449 8,479 11,449 9,755 74,550 74,600 11,460 8,485 11,460 9,766 74,600 74,650 11,471 8,491 11,471 9,777 74,650 74,700 11,482 8,497 11,482 9,788 74,700 74,750 11,493 8,503 11,493 9,799 74,750 74,800 11,504 8,509 11,504 9,810 74,800 74,850 11,515 8,515 11,515 9,821 74,850 74,900 11,526 8,521 11,526 9,832 74,900 74,950 11,537 8,527 11,537 9,843 74,950 75,000 11,548 8,533 11,548 9,854 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. 120 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 123 --- Page 123 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 75,000 75,000 75,050 11,559 8,539 11,559 9,865 75,050 75,100 11,570 8,545 11,570 9,876 75,100 75,150 11,581 8,551 11,581 9,887 75,150 75,200 11,592 8,557 11,592 9,898 75,200 75,250 11,603 8,563 11,603 9,909 75,250 75,300 11,614 8,569 11,614 9,920 75,300 75,350 11,625 8,575 11,625 9,931 75,350 75,400 11,636 8,581 11,636 9,942 75,400 75,450 11,647 8,587 11,647 9,953 75,450 75,500 11,658 8,593 11,658 9,964 75,500 75,550 11,669 8,599 11,669 9,975 75,550 75,600 11,680 8,605 11,680 9,986 75,600 75,650 11,691 8,611 11,691 9,997 75,650 75,700 11,702 8,617 11,702 10,008 75,700 75,750 11,713 8,623 11,713 10,019 75,750 75,800 11,724 8,629 11,724 10,030 75,800 75,850 11,735 8,635 11,735 10,041 75,850 75,900 11,746 8,641 11,746 10,052 75,900 75,950 11,757 8,647 11,757 10,063 75,950 76,000 11,768 8,653 11,768 10,074 76,000 76,000 76,050 11,779 8,659 11,779 10,085 76,050 76,100 11,790 8,665 11,790 10,096 76,100 76,150 11,801 8,671 11,801 10,107 76,150 76,200 11,812 8,677 11,812 10,118 76,200 76,250 11,823 8,683 11,823 10,129 76,250 76,300 11,834 8,689 11,834 10,140 76,300 76,350 11,845 8,695 11,845 10,151 76,350 76,400 11,856 8,701 11,856 10,162 76,400 76,450 11,867 8,707 11,867 10,173 76,450 76,500 11,878 8,713 11,878 10,184 76,500 76,550 11,889 8,719 11,889 10,195 76,550 76,600 11,900 8,725 11,900 10,206 76,600 76,650 11,911 8,731 11,911 10,217 76,650 76,700 11,922 8,737 11,922 10,228 76,700 76,750 11,933 8,743 11,933 10,239 76,750 76,800 11,944 8,749 11,944 10,250 76,800 76,850 11,955 8,755 11,955 10,261 76,850 76,900 11,966 8,761 11,966 10,272 76,900 76,950 11,977 8,767 11,977 10,283 76,950 77,000 11,988 8,773 11,988 10,294 77,000 77,000 77,050 11,999 8,779 11,999 10,305 77,050 77,100 12,010 8,785 12,010 10,316 77,100 77,150 12,021 8,791 12,021 10,327 77,150 77,200 12,032 8,797 12,032 10,338 77,200 77,250 12,043 8,803 12,043 10,349 77,250 77,300 12,054 8,809 12,054 10,360 77,300 77,350 12,065 8,815 12,065 10,371 77,350 77,400 12,076 8,821 12,076 10,382 77,400 77,450 12,087 8,827 12,087 10,393 77,450 77,500 12,098 8,833 12,098 10,404 77,500 77,550 12,109 8,839 12,109 10,415 77,550 77,600 12,120 8,845 12,120 10,426 77,600 77,650 12,131 8,851 12,131 10,437 77,650 77,700 12,142 8,857 12,142 10,448 77,700 77,750 12,153 8,863 12,153 10,459 77,750 77,800 12,164 8,869 12,164 10,470 77,800 77,850 12,175 8,875 12,175 10,481 77,850 77,900 12,186 8,881 12,186 10,492 77,900 77,950 12,197 8,887 12,197 10,503 77,950 78,000 12,208 8,893 12,208 10,514If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 78,000 78,000 78,050 12,219 8,899 12,219 10,525 78,050 78,100 12,230 8,905 12,230 10,536 78,100 78,150 12,241 8,911 12,241 10,547 78,150 78,200 12,252 8,917 12,252 10,558 78,200 78,250 12,263 8,923 12,263 10,569 78,250 78,300 12,274 8,929 12,274 10,580 78,300 78,350 12,285 8,935 12,285 10,591 78,350 78,400 12,296 8,941 12,296 10,602 78,400 78,450 12,307 8,947 12,307 10,613 78,450 78,500 12,318 8,953 12,318 10,624 78,500 78,550 12,329 8,959 12,329 10,635 78,550 78,600 12,340 8,965 12,340 10,646 78,600 78,650 12,351 8,971 12,351 10,657 78,650 78,700 12,362 8,977 12,362 10,668 78,700 78,750 12,373 8,983 12,373 10,679 78,750 78,800 12,384 8,989 12,384 10,690 78,800 78,850 12,395 8,995 12,395 10,701 78,850 78,900 12,406 9,001 12,406 10,712 78,900 78,950 12,417 9,007 12,417 10,723 78,950 79,000 12,428 9,013 12,428 10,734 79,000 79,000 79,050 12,439 9,019 12,439 10,745 79,050 79,100 12,450 9,025 12,450 10,756 79,100 79,150 12,461 9,031 12,461 10,767 79,150 79,200 12,472 9,037 12,472 10,778 79,200 79,250 12,483 9,043 12,483 10,789 79,250 79,300 12,494 9,049 12,494 10,800 79,300 79,350 12,505 9,055 12,505 10,811 79,350 79,400 12,516 9,061 12,516 10,822 79,400 79,450 12,527 9,067 12,527 10,833 79,450 79,500 12,538 9,073 12,538 10,844 79,500 79,550 12,549 9,079 12,549 10,855 79,550 79,600 12,560 9,085 12,560 10,866 79,600 79,650 12,571 9,091 12,571 10,877 79,650 79,700 12,582 9,097 12,582 10,888 79,700 79,750 12,593 9,103 12,593 10,899 79,750 79,800 12,604 9,109 12,604 10,910 79,800 79,850 12,615 9,115 12,615 10,921 79,850 79,900 12,626 9,121 12,626 10,932 79,900 79,950 12,637 9,127 12,637 10,943 79,950 80,000 12,648 9,133 12,648 10,954 80,000 80,000 80,050 12,659 9,139 12,659 10,965 80,050 80,100 12,670 9,145 12,670 10,976 80,100 80,150 12,681 9,151 12,681 10,987 80,150 80,200 12,692 9,157 12,692 10,998 80,200 80,250 12,703 9,163 12,703 11,009 80,250 80,300 12,714 9,169 12,714 11,020 80,300 80,350 12,725 9,175 12,725 11,031 80,350 80,400 12,736 9,181 12,736 11,042 80,400 80,450 12,747 9,187 12,747 11,053 80,450 80,500 12,758 9,193 12,758 11,064 80,500 80,550 12,769 9,199 12,769 11,075 80,550 80,600 12,780 9,205 12,780 11,086 80,600 80,650 12,791 9,211 12,791 11,097 80,650 80,700 12,802 9,217 12,802 11,108 80,700 80,750 12,813 9,223 12,813 11,119 80,750 80,800 12,824 9,229 12,824 11,130 80,800 80,850 12,835 9,235 12,835 11,141 80,850 80,900 12,846 9,241 12,846 11,152 80,900 80,950 12,857 9,247 12,857 11,163 80,950 81,000 12,868 9,253 12,868 11,174If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 81,000 81,000 81,050 12,879 9,259 12,879 11,185 81,050 81,100 12,890 9,265 12,890 11,196 81,100 81,150 12,901 9,271 12,901 11,207 81,150 81,200 12,912 9,277 12,912 11,218 81,200 81,250 12,923 9,283 12,923 11,229 81,250 81,300 12,934 9,289 12,934 11,240 81,300 81,350 12,945 9,295 12,945 11,251 81,350 81,400 12,956 9,301 12,956 11,262 81,400 81,450 12,967 9,307 12,967 11,273 81,450 81,500 12,978 9,313 12,978 11,284 81,500 81,550 12,989 9,319 12,989 11,295 81,550 81,600 13,000 9,325 13,000 11,306 81,600 81,650 13,011 9,331 13,011 11,317 81,650 81,700 13,022 9,337 13,022 11,328 81,700 81,750 13,033 9,343 13,033 11,339 81,750 81,800 13,044 9,349 13,044 11,350 81,800 81,850 13,055 9,355 13,055 11,361 81,850 81,900 13,066 9,361 13,066 11,372 81,900 81,950 13,077 9,367 13,077 11,383 81,950 82,000 13,088 9,373 13,088 11,394 82,000 82,000 82,050 13,099 9,379 13,099 11,405 82,050 82,100 13,110 9,385 13,110 11,416 82,100 82,150 13,121 9,391 13,121 11,427 82,150 82,200 13,132 9,397 13,132 11,438 82,200 82,250 13,143 9,403 13,143 11,449 82,250 82,300 13,154 9,409 13,154 11,460 82,300 82,350 13,165 9,415 13,165 11,471 82,350 82,400 13,176 9,421 13,176 11,482 82,400 82,450 13,187 9,427 13,187 11,493 82,450 82,500 13,198 9,433 13,198 11,504 82,500 82,550 13,209 9,439 13,209 11,515 82,550 82,600 13,220 9,445 13,220 11,526 82,600 82,650 13,231 9,451 13,231 11,537 82,650 82,700 13,242 9,457 13,242 11,548 82,700 82,750 13,253 9,463 13,253 11,559 82,750 82,800 13,264 9,469 13,264 11,570 82,800 82,850 13,275 9,475 13,275 11,581 82,850 82,900 13,286 9,481 13,286 11,592 82,900 82,950 13,297 9,487 13,297 11,603 82,950 83,000 13,308 9,493 13,308 11,614 83,000 83,000 83,050 13,319 9,499 13,319 11,625 83,050 83,100 13,330 9,505 13,330 11,636 83,100 83,150 13,341 9,511 13,341 11,647 83,150 83,200 13,352 9,517 13,352 11,658 83,200 83,250 13,363 9,523 13,363 11,669 83,250 83,300 13,374 9,529 13,374 11,680 83,300 83,350 13,385 9,535 13,385 11,691 83,350 83,400 13,396 9,541 13,396 11,702 83,400 83,450 13,407 9,547 13,407 11,713 83,450 83,500 13,418 9,553 13,418 11,724 83,500 83,550 13,429 9,559 13,429 11,735 83,550 83,600 13,440 9,565 13,440 11,746 83,600 83,650 13,451 9,571 13,451 11,757 83,650 83,700 13,462 9,577 13,462 11,768 83,700 83,750 13,473 9,583 13,473 11,779 83,750 83,800 13,484 9,589 13,484 11,790 83,800 83,850 13,495 9,595 13,495 11,801 83,850 83,900 13,506 9,601 13,506 11,812 83,900 83,950 13,517 9,607 13,517 11,823 83,950 84,000 13,528 9,613 13,528 11,834 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. Publication 17 (2024) 121 --- Page 124 --- Page 124 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 84,000 84,000 84,050 13,539 9,619 13,539 11,845 84,050 84,100 13,550 9,625 13,550 11,856 84,100 84,150 13,561 9,631 13,561 11,867 84,150 84,200 13,572 9,637 13,572 11,878 84,200 84,250 13,583 9,643 13,583 11,889 84,250 84,300 13,594 9,649 13,594 11,900 84,300 84,350 13,605 9,655 13,605 11,911 84,350 84,400 13,616 9,661 13,616 11,922 84,400 84,450 13,627 9,667 13,627 11,933 84,450 84,500 13,638 9,673 13,638 11,944 84,500 84,550 13,649 9,679 13,649 11,955 84,550 84,600 13,660 9,685 13,660 11,966 84,600 84,650 13,671 9,691 13,671 11,977 84,650 84,700 13,682 9,697 13,682 11,988 84,700 84,750 13,693 9,703 13,693 11,999 84,750 84,800 13,704 9,709 13,704 12,010 84,800 84,850 13,715 9,715 13,715 12,021 84,850 84,900 13,726 9,721 13,726 12,032 84,900 84,950 13,737 9,727 13,737 12,043 84,950 85,000 13,748 9,733 13,748 12,054 85,000 85,000 85,050 13,759 9,739 13,759 12,065 85,050 85,100 13,770 9,745 13,770 12,076 85,100 85,150 13,781 9,751 13,781 12,087 85,150 85,200 13,792 9,757 13,792 12,098 85,200 85,250 13,803 9,763 13,803 12,109 85,250 85,300 13,814 9,769 13,814 12,120 85,300 85,350 13,825 9,775 13,825 12,131 85,350 85,400 13,836 9,781 13,836 12,142 85,400 85,450 13,847 9,787 13,847 12,153 85,450 85,500 13,858 9,793 13,858 12,164 85,500 85,550 13,869 9,799 13,869 12,175 85,550 85,600 13,880 9,805 13,880 12,186 85,600 85,650 13,891 9,811 13,891 12,197 85,650 85,700 13,902 9,817 13,902 12,208 85,700 85,750 13,913 9,823 13,913 12,219 85,750 85,800 13,924 9,829 13,924 12,230 85,800 85,850 13,935 9,835 13,935 12,241 85,850 85,900 13,946 9,841 13,946 12,252 85,900 85,950 13,957 9,847 13,957 12,263 85,950 86,000 13,968 9,853 13,968 12,274 86,000 86,000 86,050 13,979 9,859 13,979 12,285 86,050 86,100 13,990 9,865 13,990 12,296 86,100 86,150 14,001 9,871 14,001 12,307 86,150 86,200 14,012 9,877 14,012 12,318 86,200 86,250 14,023 9,883 14,023 12,329 86,250 86,300 14,034 9,889 14,034 12,340 86,300 86,350 14,045 9,895 14,045 12,351 86,350 86,400 14,056 9,901 14,056 12,362 86,400 86,450 14,067 9,907 14,067 12,373 86,450 86,500 14,078 9,913 14,078 12,384 86,500 86,550 14,089 9,919 14,089 12,395 86,550 86,600 14,100 9,925 14,100 12,406 86,600 86,650 14,111 9,931 14,111 12,417 86,650 86,700 14,122 9,937 14,122 12,428 86,700 86,750 14,133 9,943 14,133 12,439 86,750 86,800 14,144 9,949 14,144 12,450 86,800 86,850 14,155 9,955 14,155 12,461 86,850 86,900 14,166 9,961 14,166 12,472 86,900 86,950 14,177 9,967 14,177 12,483 86,950 87,000 14,188 9,973 14,188 12,494If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 87,000 87,000 87,050 14,199 9,979 14,199 12,505 87,050 87,100 14,210 9,985 14,210 12,516 87,100 87,150 14,221 9,991 14,221 12,527 87,150 87,200 14,232 9,997 14,232 12,538 87,200 87,250 14,243 10,003 14,243 12,549 87,250 87,300 14,254 10,009 14,254 12,560 87,300 87,350 14,265 10,015 14,265 12,571 87,350 87,400 14,276 10,021 14,276 12,582 87,400 87,450 14,287 10,027 14,287 12,593 87,450 87,500 14,298 10,033 14,298 12,604 87,500 87,550 14,309 10,039 14,309 12,615 87,550 87,600 14,320 10,045 14,320 12,626 87,600 87,650 14,331 10,051 14,331 12,637 87,650 87,700 14,342 10,057 14,342 12,648 87,700 87,750 14,353 10,063 14,353 12,659 87,750 87,800 14,364 10,069 14,364 12,670 87,800 87,850 14,375 10,075 14,375 12,681 87,850 87,900 14,386 10,081 14,386 12,692 87,900 87,950 14,397 10,087 14,397 12,703 87,950 88,000 14,408 10,093 14,408 12,714 88,000 88,000 88,050 14,419 10,099 14,419 12,725 88,050 88,100 14,430 10,105 14,430 12,736 88,100 88,150 14,441 10,111 14,441 12,747 88,150 88,200 14,452 10,117 14,452 12,758 88,200 88,250 14,463 10,123 14,463 12,769 88,250 88,300 14,474 10,129 14,474 12,780 88,300 88,350 14,485 10,135 14,485 12,791 88,350 88,400 14,496 10,141 14,496 12,802 88,400 88,450 14,507 10,147 14,507 12,813 88,450 88,500 14,518 10,153 14,518 12,824 88,500 88,550 14,529 10,159 14,529 12,835 88,550 88,600 14,540 10,165 14,540 12,846 88,600 88,650 14,551 10,171 14,551 12,857 88,650 88,700 14,562 10,177 14,562 12,868 88,700 88,750 14,573 10,183 14,573 12,879 88,750 88,800 14,584 10,189 14,584 12,890 88,800 88,850 14,595 10,195 14,595 12,901 88,850 88,900 14,606 10,201 14,606 12,912 88,900 88,950 14,617 10,207 14,617 12,923 88,950 89,000 14,628 10,213 14,628 12,934 89,000 89,000 89,050 14,639 10,219 14,639 12,945 89,050 89,100 14,650 10,225 14,650 12,956 89,100 89,150 14,661 10,231 14,661 12,967 89,150 89,200 14,672 10,237 14,672 12,978 89,200 89,250 14,683 10,243 14,683 12,989 89,250 89,300 14,694 10,249 14,694 13,000 89,300 89,350 14,705 10,255 14,705 13,011 89,350 89,400 14,716 10,261 14,716 13,022 89,400 89,450 14,727 10,267 14,727 13,033 89,450 89,500 14,738 10,273 14,738 13,044 89,500 89,550 14,749 10,279 14,749 13,055 89,550 89,600 14,760 10,285 14,760 13,066 89,600 89,650 14,771 10,291 14,771 13,077 89,650 89,700 14,782 10,297 14,782 13,088 89,700 89,750 14,793 10,303 14,793 13,099 89,750 89,800 14,804 10,309 14,804 13,110 89,800 89,850 14,815 10,315 14,815 13,121 89,850 89,900 14,826 10,321 14,826 13,132 89,900 89,950 14,837 10,327 14,837 13,143 89,950 90,000 14,848 10,333 14,848 13,154If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 90,000 90,000 90,050 14,859 10,339 14,859 13,165 90,050 90,100 14,870 10,345 14,870 13,176 90,100 90,150 14,881 10,351 14,881 13,187 90,150 90,200 14,892 10,357 14,892 13,198 90,200 90,250 14,903 10,363 14,903 13,209 90,250 90,300 14,914 10,369 14,914 13,220 90,300 90,350 14,925 10,375 14,925 13,231 90,350 90,400 14,936 10,381 14,936 13,242 90,400 90,450 14,947 10,387 14,947 13,253 90,450 90,500 14,958 10,393 14,958 13,264 90,500 90,550 14,969 10,399 14,969 13,275 90,550 90,600 14,980 10,405 14,980 13,286 90,600 90,650 14,991 10,411 14,991 13,297 90,650 90,700 15,002 10,417 15,002 13,308 90,700 90,750 15,013 10,423 15,013 13,319 90,750 90,800 15,024 10,429 15,024 13,330 90,800 90,850 15,035 10,435 15,035 13,341 90,850 90,900 15,046 10,441 15,046 13,352 90,900 90,950 15,057 10,447 15,057 13,363 90,950 91,000 15,068 10,453 15,068 13,374 91,000 91,000 91,050 15,079 10,459 15,079 13,385 91,050 91,100 15,090 10,465 15,090 13,396 91,100 91,150 15,101 10,471 15,101 13,407 91,150 91,200 15,112 10,477 15,112 13,418 91,200 91,250 15,123 10,483 15,123 13,429 91,250 91,300 15,134 10,489 15,134 13,440 91,300 91,350 15,145 10,495 15,145 13,451 91,350 91,400 15,156 10,501 15,156 13,462 91,400 91,450 15,167 10,507 15,167 13,473 91,450 91,500 15,178 10,513 15,178 13,484 91,500 91,550 15,189 10,519 15,189 13,495 91,550 91,600 15,200 10,525 15,200 13,506 91,600 91,650 15,211 10,531 15,211 13,517 91,650 91,700 15,222 10,537 15,222 13,528 91,700 91,750 15,233 10,543 15,233 13,539 91,750 91,800 15,244 10,549 15,244 13,550 91,800 91,850 15,255 10,555 15,255 13,561 91,850 91,900 15,266 10,561 15,266 13,572 91,900 91,950 15,277 10,567 15,277 13,583 91,950 92,000 15,288 10,573 15,288 13,594 92,000 92,000 92,050 15,299 10,579 15,299 13,605 92,050 92,100 15,310 10,585 15,310 13,616 92,100 92,150 15,321 10,591 15,321 13,627 92,150 92,200 15,332 10,597 15,332 13,638 92,200 92,250 15,343 10,603 15,343 13,649 92,250 92,300 15,354 10,609 15,354 13,660 92,300 92,350 15,365 10,615 15,365 13,671 92,350 92,400 15,376 10,621 15,376 13,682 92,400 92,450 15,387 10,627 15,387 13,693 92,450 92,500 15,398 10,633 15,398 13,704 92,500 92,550 15,409 10,639 15,409 13,715 92,550 92,600 15,420 10,645 15,420 13,726 92,600 92,650 15,431 10,651 15,431 13,737 92,650 92,700 15,442 10,657 15,442 13,748 92,700 92,750 15,453 10,663 15,453 13,759 92,750 92,800 15,464 10,669 15,464 13,770 92,800 92,850 15,475 10,675 15,475 13,781 92,850 92,900 15,486 10,681 15,486 13,792 92,900 92,950 15,497 10,687 15,497 13,803 92,950 93,000 15,508 10,693 15,508 13,814 (Continued) * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. 122 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 125 --- Page 125 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Table — Continued If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 93,000 93,000 93,050 15,519 10,699 15,519 13,825 93,050 93,100 15,530 10,705 15,530 13,836 93,100 93,150 15,541 10,711 15,541 13,847 93,150 93,200 15,552 10,717 15,552 13,858 93,200 93,250 15,563 10,723 15,563 13,869 93,250 93,300 15,574 10,729 15,574 13,880 93,300 93,350 15,585 10,735 15,585 13,891 93,350 93,400 15,596 10,741 15,596 13,902 93,400 93,450 15,607 10,747 15,607 13,913 93,450 93,500 15,618 10,753 15,618 13,924 93,500 93,550 15,629 10,759 15,629 13,935 93,550 93,600 15,640 10,765 15,640 13,946 93,600 93,650 15,651 10,771 15,651 13,957 93,650 93,700 15,662 10,777 15,662 13,968 93,700 93,750 15,673 10,783 15,673 13,979 93,750 93,800 15,684 10,789 15,684 13,990 93,800 93,850 15,695 10,795 15,695 14,001 93,850 93,900 15,706 10,801 15,706 14,012 93,900 93,950 15,717 10,807 15,717 14,023 93,950 94,000 15,728 10,813 15,728 14,034 94,000 94,000 94,050 15,739 10,819 15,739 14,045 94,050 94,100 15,750 10,825 15,750 14,056 94,100 94,150 15,761 10,831 15,761 14,067 94,150 94,200 15,772 10,837 15,772 14,078 94,200 94,250 15,783 10,843 15,783 14,089 94,250 94,300 15,794 10,849 15,794 14,100 94,300 94,350 15,805 10,858 15,805 14,111 94,350 94,400 15,816 10,869 15,816 14,122 94,400 94,450 15,827 10,880 15,827 14,133 94,450 94,500 15,838 10,891 15,838 14,144 94,500 94,550 15,849 10,902 15,849 14,155 94,550 94,600 15,860 10,913 15,860 14,166 94,600 94,650 15,871 10,924 15,871 14,177 94,650 94,700 15,882 10,935 15,882 14,188 94,700 94,750 15,893 10,946 15,893 14,199 94,750 94,800 15,904 10,957 15,904 14,210 94,800 94,850 15,915 10,968 15,915 14,221 94,850 94,900 15,926 10,979 15,926 14,232 94,900 94,950 15,937 10,990 15,937 14,243 94,950 95,000 15,948 11,001 15,948 14,254 95,000 95,000 95,050 15,959 11,012 15,959 14,265 95,050 95,100 15,970 11,023 15,970 14,276 95,100 95,150 15,981 11,034 15,981 14,287 95,150 95,200 15,992 11,045 15,992 14,298 95,200 95,250 16,003 11,056 16,003 14,309 95,250 95,300 16,014 11,067 16,014 14,320 95,300 95,350 16,025 11,078 16,025 14,331 95,350 95,400 16,036 11,089 16,036 14,342 95,400 95,450 16,047 11,100 16,047 14,353 95,450 95,500 16,058 11,111 16,058 14,364 95,500 95,550 16,069 11,122 16,069 14,375 95,550 95,600 16,080 11,133 16,080 14,386 95,600 95,650 16,091 11,144 16,091 14,397 95,650 95,700 16,102 11,155 16,102 14,408 95,700 95,750 16,113 11,166 16,113 14,419 95,750 95,800 16,124 11,177 16,124 14,430 95,800 95,850 16,135 11,188 16,135 14,441 95,850 95,900 16,146 11,199 16,146 14,452 95,900 95,950 16,157 11,210 16,157 14,463 95,950 96,000 16,168 11,221 16,168 14,474If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 96,000 96,000 96,050 16,179 11,232 16,179 14,485 96,050 96,100 16,190 11,243 16,190 14,496 96,100 96,150 16,201 11,254 16,201 14,507 96,150 96,200 16,212 11,265 16,212 14,518 96,200 96,250 16,223 11,276 16,223 14,529 96,250 96,300 16,234 11,287 16,234 14,540 96,300 96,350 16,245 11,298 16,245 14,551 96,350 96,400 16,256 11,309 16,256 14,562 96,400 96,450 16,267 11,320 16,267 14,573 96,450 96,500 16,278 11,331 16,278 14,584 96,500 96,550 16,289 11,342 16,289 14,595 96,550 96,600 16,300 11,353 16,300 14,606 96,600 96,650 16,311 11,364 16,311 14,617 96,650 96,700 16,322 11,375 16,322 14,628 96,700 96,750 16,333 11,386 16,333 14,639 96,750 96,800 16,344 11,397 16,344 14,650 96,800 96,850 16,355 11,408 16,355 14,661 96,850 96,900 16,366 11,419 16,366 14,672 96,900 96,950 16,377 11,430 16,377 14,683 96,950 97,000 16,388 11,441 16,388 14,694 97,000 97,000 97,050 16,399 11,452 16,399 14,705 97,050 97,100 16,410 11,463 16,410 14,716 97,100 97,150 16,421 11,474 16,421 14,727 97,150 97,200 16,432 11,485 16,432 14,738 97,200 97,250 16,443 11,496 16,443 14,749 97,250 97,300 16,454 11,507 16,454 14,760 97,300 97,350 16,465 11,518 16,465 14,771 97,350 97,400 16,476 11,529 16,476 14,782 97,400 97,450 16,487 11,540 16,487 14,793 97,450 97,500 16,498 11,551 16,498 14,804 97,500 97,550 16,509 11,562 16,509 14,815 97,550 97,600 16,520 11,573 16,520 14,826 97,600 97,650 16,531 11,584 16,531 14,837 97,650 97,700 16,542 11,595 16,542 14,848 97,700 97,750 16,553 11,606 16,553 14,859 97,750 97,800 16,564 11,617 16,564 14,870 97,800 97,850 16,575 11,628 16,575 14,881 97,850 97,900 16,586 11,639 16,586 14,892 97,900 97,950 16,597 11,650 16,597 14,903 97,950 98,000 16,608 11,661 16,608 14,914 98,000 98,000 98,050 16,619 11,672 16,619 14,925 98,050 98,100 16,630 11,683 16,630 14,936 98,100 98,150 16,641 11,694 16,641 14,947 98,150 98,200 16,652 11,705 16,652 14,958 98,200 98,250 16,663 11,716 16,663 14,969 98,250 98,300 16,674 11,727 16,674 14,980 98,300 98,350 16,685 11,738 16,685 14,991 98,350 98,400 16,696 11,749 16,696 15,002 98,400 98,450 16,707 11,760 16,707 15,013 98,450 98,500 16,718 11,771 16,718 15,024 98,500 98,550 16,729 11,782 16,729 15,035 98,550 98,600 16,740 11,793 16,740 15,046 98,600 98,650 16,751 11,804 16,751 15,057 98,650 98,700 16,762 11,815 16,762 15,068 98,700 98,750 16,773 11,826 16,773 15,079 98,750 98,800 16,784 11,837 16,784 15,090 98,800 98,850 16,795 11,848 16,795 15,101 98,850 98,900 16,806 11,859 16,806 15,112 98,900 98,950 16,817 11,870 16,817 15,123 98,950 99,000 16,828 11,881 16,828 15,134If line 15 (taxable income) is—And you are— At leastBut less thanSingle Married filing jointly *Married filing sepa - ratelyHead of a house - hold Your tax is— 99,000 99,000 99,050 16,839 11,892 16,839 15,145 99,050 99,100 16,850 11,903 16,850 15,156 99,100 99,150 16,861 11,914 16,861 15,167 99,150 99,200 16,872 11,925 16,872 15,178 99,200 99,250 16,883 11,936 16,883 15,189 99,250 99,300 16,894 11,947 16,894 15,200 99,300 99,350 16,905 11,958 16,905 15,211 99,350 99,400 16,916 11,969 16,916 15,222 99,400 99,450 16,927 11,980 16,927 15,233 99,450 99,500 16,938 11,991 16,938 15,244 99,500 99,550 16,949 12,002 16,949 15,255 99,550 99,600 16,960 12,013 16,960 15,266 99,600 99,650 16,971 12,024 16,971 15,277 99,650 99,700 16,982 12,035 16,982 15,288 99,700 99,750 16,993 12,046 16,993 15,299 99,750 99,800 17,004 12,057 17,004 15,310 99,800 99,850 17,015 12,068 17,015 15,321 99,850 99,900 17,026 12,079 17,026 15,332 99,900 99,950 17,037 12,090 17,037 15,343 99,950 100,000 17,048 12,101 17,048 15,354 $100,000 or over use the T ax Computation Worksheet * This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse. Publication 17 (2024) 123 --- Page 126 --- Page 126 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Computation Worksheet—Line 16 CAUTION! See Line 16 in the Instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax. Note. If you’re required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain T ax Worksheet, the Schedule D T ax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income T ax Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you’re looking up. Enter the result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you’re completing. Section A— Use if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you. Taxable income. If line 15 is—(a) Enter the amount from line 15.(b) Multiplication amount(c) Multiply (a) by (b).(d) Subtraction amountTax. Subtract (d) from (c). Enter the result here and on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 16. At least $100,000 but not over $100,525 $ × 22% (0.22) $ $ 4,947.00 $ Over $100,525 but not over $191,950 $ × 24% (0.24) $ $ 6,957.50 $ Over $191,950 but not over $243,725 $ × 32% (0.32) $ $ 22,313.50 $ Over $243,725 but not over $609,350 $ × 35% (0.35) $ $ 29,625.25 $ Over $609,350 $ × 37% (0.37) $ $ 41,812.25 $ Section B— Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse. Complete the row below that applies to you. Taxable income. If line 15 is—(a) Enter the amount from line 15.(b) Multiplication amount(c) Multiply (a) by (b).(d) Subtraction amountTax. Subtract (d) from (c). Enter the result here and on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 16. At least $100,000 but not over $201,050 $ × 22% (0.22) $ $ 9,894.00 $ Over $201,050 but not over $383,900 $ × 24% (0.24) $ $ 13,915.00 $ Over $383,900 but not over $487,450 $ × 32% (0.32) $ $ 44,627.00 $ Over $487,450 but not over $731,200 $ × 35% (0.35) $ $ 59,250.50 $ Over $731,200 $ × 37% (0.37) $ $ 73,874.50 $ Section C— Use if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you. Taxable income. If line 15 is—(a) Enter the amount from line 15.(b) Multiplication amount(c) Multiply (a) by (b).(d) Subtraction amountTax. Subtract (d) from (c). Enter the result here and on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 16. At least $100,000 but not over $100,525 $ × 22% (0.22) $ $ 4,947.00 $ Over $100,525 but not over $191,950 $ × 24% (0.24) $ $ 6,957.50 $ Over $191,950 but not over $243,725 $ × 32% (0.32) $ $ 22,313.50 $ Over $243,725 but not over $365,600 $ × 35% (0.35) $ $ 29,625.25 $ Over $365,600 $ × 37% (0.37) $ $ 36,937.25 $ 124 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 127 --- Page 127 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Section D— Use if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you. Taxable income. If line 15 is—(a) Enter the amount from line 15.(b) Multiplication amount(c) Multiply (a) by (b).(d) Subtraction amountTax. Subtract (d) from (c). Enter the result here and on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 16. At least $100,000 but not over $100,500 $ × 22% (0.22) $ $ 6,641.00 $ Over $100,500 but not over $191,950 $ × 24% (0.24) $ $ 8,651.00 $ Over $191,950 but not over $243,700 $ × 32% (0.32) $ $ 24,007.00 $ Over $243,700 but not over $609,350 $ × 35% (0.35) $ $ 31,318.00 $ Over $609,350 $ × 37% (0.37) $ $ 43,505.00 $ Publication 17 (2024) 125 --- Page 128 --- Page 128 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. 2024 Tax Rate Schedules CAUTION! The T ax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies to all levels of taxable income. Don’t use them to figure your tax. Instead, see chapter 13 . Schedule X— If your filing status is Single If your taxable income is: The tax is: Over— But not over— of the amount over— $0 $11,600 - - - - - - - 10% $0 11,600 47,150 $1,160.00 + 12% 11,600 47,150 100,525 5,426.00 + 22% 47,150 100,525 191,950 17,168.50 + 24% 100,525 191,950 243,725 39,110.50 + 32% 191,950 243,725 609,350 55,678.50 + 35% 243,725 609,350 - - - - - - - 183,647.25 + 37% 609,350 Schedule Y-1— If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse If your taxable income is: The tax is: Over— But not over— of the amount over— $0 $23,200 - - - - - - - 10% $0 23,200 94,300 $2,320.00 + 12% 23,200 94,300 201,050 10,852.00 + 22% 94,300 201,050 383,900 34,337.00 + 24% 201,050 383,900 487,450 78,221.00 + 32% 383,900 487,450 731,200 111,357.00 + 35% 487,450 731,200 - - - - - - - 196,669.50 + 37% 731,200 Schedule Y-2— If your filing status is Married filing separately If your taxable income is: The tax is: Over— But not over— of the amount over— $0 $11,600 - - - - - - - 10% $0 11,600 47,150 $1,160.00 + 12% 11,600 47,150 100,525 5,426.00 + 22% 47,150 100,525 191,950 17,168.50 + 24% 100,525 191,950 243,725 39,110.50 + 32% 191,950 243,725 365,600 55,678.50 + 35% 243,725 365,600 - - - - - - - 98,334.75 + 37% 365,600 Schedule Z— If your filing status is Head of household If your taxable income is: The tax is: Over— But not over— of the amount over— $0 $16,550 - - - - - - - 10% $0 16,550 63,100 $1,655.00 + 12% 16,550 63,100 100,500 7,241.00 + 22% 63,100 100,500 191,950 15,469.00 + 24% 100,500 191,950 243,700 37,417.00 + 32% 191,950 243,700 609,350 53,977.00 + 35% 243,700 609,350 - - - - - - - 181,954.50 + 37% 609,350 126 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 129 --- Page 129 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Your Rights as a Taxpayer This section explains your rights as a taxpayer and the processes for examination, appeal, collection, and refunds. The Taxpayer Bill of Rights 1. The Right to Be Informed. T axpayers have the right to know what they need to do to comply with the tax laws. They are entitled to clear explanations of the laws and IRS procedures in all tax forms, instructions, publications, notices, and correspondence. They have the right to be informed of IRS decisions about their tax ac- counts and to receive clear explan- ations of the outcomes. 2. The Right to Quality Service. T axpayers have the right to receive prompt, courteous, and professio- nal assistance in their dealings with the IRS, to be spoken to in a way they can easily understand, to re- ceive clear and easily understand- able communications from the IRS, and to speak to a supervisor about inadequate service. 3. The Right to Pay No More than the Correct Amount of Tax. T axpayers have the right to pay only the amount of tax legally due, including interest and penalties, and to have the IRS apply all tax payments properly. 4. The Right to Challenge the IRS’s Position and Be Heard. T axpayers have the right to raise objections and provide additional documentation in response to for- mal IRS actions or proposed ac- tions, to expect that the IRS will consider their timely objections and documentation promptly and fairly, and to receive a response if the IRS does not agree with their position. 5. The Right to Appeal an IRS Decision in an Independent Fo- rum. T axpayers are entitled to a fair and impartial administrative ap- peal of most IRS decisions, includ- ing many penalties, and have the right to receive a written response regarding the IRS Independent Of- fice of Appeals' decision. T axpay- ers generally have the right to take their cases to court. 6. The Right to Finality. T axpay- ers have the right to know the max- imum amount of time they have to challenge the IRS’s position as well as the maximum amount of time the IRS has to audit a particular tax year or collect a tax debt. T axpay-ers have the right to know when the IRS has finished an audit. 7. The Right to Privacy. T axpay- ers have the right to expect that any IRS inquiry, examination, or enforcement action will comply with the law and be no more intru- sive than necessary, and will re- spect all due process rights, includ- ing search and seizure protections, and will provide, where applicable, a collection due process hearing. 8. The Right to Confidentiality. T axpayers have the right to expect that any information they provide to the IRS will not be disclosed unless authorized by the taxpayer or by law. T axpayers have the right to ex- pect appropriate action will be taken against employees, return preparers, and others who wrong- fully use or disclose taxpayer return information. 9. The Right to Retain Repre- sentation. T axpayers have the right to retain an authorized repre- sentative of their choice to repre- sent them in their dealings with the IRS. T axpayers have the right to seek assistance from a Low In- come T axpayer Clinic if they cannot afford representation. 10. The Right to a Fair and Just Tax System. T axpayers have the right to expect the tax system to consider facts and circumstances that might affect their underlying li- abilities, ability to pay, or ability to provide information timely. T axpay- ers have the right to receive assis- tance from the T axpayer Advocate Service if they are experiencing fi- nancial difficulty or if the IRS has not resolved their tax issues prop- erly and timely through its normal channels. Examinations (Audits) We accept most taxpayers’ returns as filed. If we inquire about your re- turn or select it for examination, it does not suggest that you are dis- honest. The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more tax. We may close your case without change; or, you may receive a re- fund. The process of selecting a re- turn for examination usually begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer programs to identify re- turns that may have incorrect amounts. These programs may be based on information returns, such as Forms 1099 and W -2, on stud- ies of past examinations, or on cer- tain issues identified by compli- ance projects. Second, we use information from outside sources that indicates that a return may have incorrect amounts. These sources may include newspapers, public records, and individuals. If we determine that the information is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a return for exami- nation. Pub. 556, Examination of Re- turns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and procedures that we follow in exami- nations. The following sections give an overview of how we con- duct examinations. By mail. We handle many exami- nations and inquiries by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for more information or a reason why we believe a change to your return may be needed. Y ou can respond by mail or you can re- quest a personal interview with an examiner. If you mail us the re- quested information or provide an explanation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will explain the reasons for any changes. Do not hesitate to write to us about anything you do not understand. By interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your examination through a personal interview, or you request such an interview, you have the right to ask that the ex- amination take place at a reasona- ble time and place that is conven- ient for both you and the IRS. If our examiner proposes any changes to your return, they will explain the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with these changes, you can meet with the examiner's su- pervisor. Repeat examinations. If we ex- amined your return for the same items in either of the 2 previous years and proposed no change to your tax liability, contact us as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue the examina- tion. Appeals If you do not agree with the exam- iner's proposed changes, you can appeal them to the IRS Independ- ent Office of Appeals. Most differ- ences can be settled without ex- pensive and time -consuming court trials. Y our appeal rights are ex- plained in detail in both Pub. 5, Y our Appeal Rights and How to Prepare a Protest if Y ou Don't Agree, and Pub. 556. If you do not wish to use the IRS Independent Office of Appeals or disagree with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the U.S. T ax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S. District Court where you live. If you take your case to court, the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if you kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper- ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the court agrees with you on most issues in your case and finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may be able to recover some of your ad- ministrative and litigation costs. Y ou will not be eligible to recover these costs unless you tried to re- solve your case administratively, in- cluding going through the appeals system, and you gave us the infor- mation necessary to resolve the case. Collections Pub. 594, The IRS Collection Proc- ess, explains your rights and re- sponsibilities regarding payment of federal taxes. It describes the fol- lowing. •What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think your bill is wrong. It also covers making installment payments, delay- ing collection action, and sub- mitting an offer in compro- mise. •IRS collection actions. It cov- ers liens, releasing a lien, lev- ies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, and release of property. •IRS certification to the State Department of a seriously de- linquent tax debt, which will generally result in denial of a passport application and may lead to revocation of a pass- port. Y our collection appeal rights are explained in detail in Pub. 1660, Collection Appeal Rights. Innocent spouse relief. Gener- ally, both you and your spouse are each responsible for paying the full amount of tax, interest, and penal- ties due on your joint return. How- ever, if you qualify for innocent spouse relief, you may be relieved Publication 17 (2024) 127 --- Page 130 --- Page 130 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. of part or all of the joint liability. T o request relief, you must file Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. For more informa- tion on innocent spouse relief, see Pub. 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, and Form 8857. Potential third -party contacts. Generally, the IRS will deal directly with you or your duly authorized representative. However, we some- times talk with other persons if we need information that you have been unable to provide, or to verify information we have received. If we do contact other persons, such as a neighbor, a bank, an employer, or employees, we will generally need to tell them limited information, such as your name. The law pro- hibits us from disclosing any more information than is necessary to obtain or verify the information we are seeking. Our need to contact other persons may continue as long as there is activity in your case. If we do contact other per-sons, you have a right to request a list of those contacted. Y our re- quest can be made by telephone, in writing, or during a personal in- terview. Refunds Y ou may file a claim for refund if you think you paid too much tax. Y ou must generally file the claim within 3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. The law gener- ally provides for interest on your re- fund if it is not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or claim for refund. Pub. 556 has more information on refunds. If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you must gen- erally file your return within 3 years from the date the return was due (including extensions) to get that refund.Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) TAS is an independent organiza- tion within the IRS that can help protect your taxpayer rights. They can offer you help if your tax prob- lem is causing a hardship, or you've tried but haven't been able to resolve your problem with the IRS. If you qualify for their assis- tance, which is always free, they will do everything possible to help you. Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov or call 877-777-4778. Tax Information The IRS provides the following sources for forms, publications, and additional information. •Internet : IRS.gov. •T ax Questions :IRS.gov/Help/T ax-Law- Questions and How T o Get T ax Help . •Forms and Publications : IRS.gov/Forms and IRS.gov/OrderForms . •Small Business Ombudsman : A small business entity can participate in the regulatory process and comment on en- forcement actions of the IRS by calling 888-REG-FAIR. •T reasury Inspector General for T ax Administration : Y ou can confidentially report miscon- duct, waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRS employee by calling 800-366-4484. People who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech disability and who have access to TTY/TDD equipment can call 800-877-8339. Y ou can re- main anonymous. How To Get Tax Help If you have questions about a tax issue; need help preparing your tax return; or want to download free publications, forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov to find resources that can help you right away. Preparing and filing your tax re- turn. After receiving all your wage and earnings statements (Forms W-2, W -2G, 1099 -R, 1099 -MISC, 1099- NEC, etc.); unemployment compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or other gov- ernment payment statements (Form 1099 -G); and interest, divi- dend, and retirement statements from banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have several op- tions to choose from to prepare and file your tax return. Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you qualify for free tax prepara- tion, or hire a tax professional to prepare your return. Free options for tax preparation. Y our options for preparing and fil- ing your return online or in your lo- cal community, if you qualify, in- clude the following. •Direct File. Direct File is a permanent option to file indi- vidual federal tax returns on- line—for free—directly and securely with the IRS. Direct File is an option for taxpayers in participating states who have relatively simple tax re- turns reporting certain types of income and claiming certain credits and deduc- tions. While Direct File doesn't prepare state returns, if you live in a participating state, Di- rect File guides you to a state-supported tool you can use to prepare and file your state tax return for free. Go to IRS.gov/DirectFile for more in- formation, program updates, and frequently asked ques- tions. •Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your fed- eral individual income tax re- turn for free using software or Free File Fillable Forms. How- ever, state tax preparation may not be available through Free File. Go to IRS.gov/ FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online federal tax preparation, e-filing, and di- rect deposit or payment op- tions. •VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) pro- gram offers free tax help to people with low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabil- ities, and limited-Eng- lish-speaking taxpayers who need help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/ VITA , download the free IRS2Go app, or call 800-906-9887 for information on free tax return preparation.•TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program of- fers free tax help for all tax- payers, particularly those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volunteers specialize in answering questions about pensions and retirement-rela- ted issues unique to seniors. Go to IRS.gov/TCE or down- load the free IRS2Go app for information on free tax return preparation. •MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and qualified veterans may use MilT ax, a free tax service offered by the Department of Defense through Military OneSource. For more information, go to MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/ MilT ax ). Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can be completed online and then e-filed regardless of income. Using online tools to help pre- pare your return. Go to IRS.gov/ T ools for the following. •IRS.gov/DirectFile offers an Eligibility Checker to help you determine if Direct File is the right choice for your tax filing needs. •The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/ EITCAssistant ) determines if you’re eligible for the earned income credit (EIC). •The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN ) helps you get an employer identification number (EIN) at no cost. •The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App ) makes it easier for you to esti- mate the federal income tax you want your employer to withhold from your paycheck. This is tax withholding. See how your withholding affects your refund, take-home pay, or tax due. •The First- Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer ) tool provides information on your repayments and account bal- ance. •The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/SalesT ax ) figures the amount you can claim if you itemize deduc- tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Getting answers to your tax questions. On IRS.gov, you can get up-to- date information on current events and changes in tax law. •IRS.gov/Help : A variety of tools to help you get answers to some of the most common tax questions. 128 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 131 --- Page 131 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. •IRS.gov/ITA : The Interactive T ax Assistant, a tool that will ask you questions and, based on your input, provide an- swers on a number of tax top- ics. •IRS.gov/Forms : Find forms, in- structions, and publications. Y ou will find details on the most recent tax changes and interactive links to help you find answers to your ques- tions. •Y ou may also be able to ac- cess tax information in your e-filing software. Need someone to prepare your tax return? There are various types of tax return preparers, in- cluding enrolled agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), ac- countants, and many others who don’t have professional credentials. If you choose to have someone prepare your tax return, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax pre- parer is: •Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accuracy of your return, •Required to sign the return, and •Required to include their pre- parer tax identification number (PTIN). Although the tax preparer always signs the return, you're ultimately responsi- ble for providing all the information required for the preparer to accu- rately prepare your return and for the accuracy of every item reported on the return. Anyone paid to pre- pare tax returns for others should have a thorough understanding of tax matters. For more information on how to choose a tax preparer, go to Tips for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov. Employers can register to use Business Services Online. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers online service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure W -2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, and individuals who proc- ess Form W -2, Wage and T ax Statement; and Form W -2c, Cor- rected Wage and T ax Statement. Business tax account. If you are a sole proprietor, a partnership, or an S corporation, you can view your tax information on record with the IRS and do more with a busi- ness tax account. Go to IRS.gov/ BusinessAccount for more informa- tion. CAUTION!IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/ SocialMedia to see the various so- cial media tools the IRS uses to share the latest information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are our high- est priority. We use these tools to share public information with you. Don’t post your social security number (SSN) or other confidential information on social media sites. Always protect your identity when using any social networking site. The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide short, informative videos on various tax -related top- ics in English, Spanish, and ASL. •Y outube.com/irsvideos . •Y outube.com/ irsvideosmultilingua . •Y outube.com/irsvideosASL . Online tax information in other languages. Y ou can find informa- tion on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t your native language. Free Over -the- Phone Interpreter (OPI) Service. The IRS is com- mitted to serving taxpayers with limited- English proficiency (LEP) by offering OPI services. The OPI Service is a federally funded pro- gram and is available at T axpayer Assistance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, and every VITA/TCE tax return site. The OPI Service is accessible in more than 350 lan- guages. Accessibility Helpline available for taxpayers with disabilities. T axpayers who need information about accessibility services can call 833 -690- 0598. The Accessibil- ity Helpline can answer questions related to current and future acces- sibility products and services avail- able in alternative media formats (for example, braille, large print, au- dio, etc.). The Accessibility Help- line does not have access to your IRS account. For help with tax law, refunds, or account -related issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp . Alternative media preference. Form 9000, Alternative Media Pref- erence, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to receive certain types of written correspondence in the following formats. •Standard Print. •Large Print. •Braille. •Audio (MP3). •Plain T ext File (TXT). •Braille Ready File (BRF).Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/ DisasterRelief to review the availa- ble disaster tax relief. Getting tax forms and publica- tions. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all the forms, instructions, and publica- tions you may need. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order. Mobile- friendly forms. Y ou'll need an IRS Online Account (OLA) to complete mobile -friendly forms that require signatures. Y ou'll have the option to submit your form(s) online or download a copy for mail- ing. Y ou'll need scans of your docu- ments to support your submission. Go to IRS.gov/ MobileFriendlyForms for more in- formation. Getting tax publications and in- structions in eBook format. Download and view most tax publi- cations and instructions (including the Instructions for Form 1040) on mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks . IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple's iBooks for iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tested on other dedicated eBook readers, and eBook functionality may not operate as intended. Access your online account (in- dividual taxpayers only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely ac- cess information about your federal tax account. •View the amount you owe and a breakdown by tax year. •See payment plan details or apply for a new payment plan. •Make a payment or view 5 years of payment history and any pending or scheduled payments. •Access your tax records, in- cluding key data from your most recent tax return, and transcripts. •View digital copies of select notices from the IRS. •Approve or reject authoriza- tion requests from tax profes- sionals. •View your address on file or manage your communication preferences. Get a transcript of your return. With an online account, you can access a variety of information to help you during the filing season. Y ou can get a transcript, review your most recently filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross in- come. Create or access your on- line account at IRS.gov/Account .Tax Pro Account. This tool lets your tax professional submit an au- thorization request to access your individual taxpayer IRS OLA. For more information, go to IRS.gov/ T axProAccount . Using direct deposit. The safest and easiest way to receive a tax re- fund is to e -file and choose direct deposit, which securely and elec- tronically transfers your refund di- rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also avoids the pos- sibility that your check could be lost, stolen, destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 10 taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their refunds. If you don’t have a bank account, go to IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more in- formation on where to find a bank or credit union that can open an ac- count online. Reporting and resolving your tax-related identity theft issues. •T ax-related identity theft hap- pens when someone steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. Y our taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit. •The IRS doesn’t initiate con- tact with taxpayers by email, text messages (including shortened links), telephone calls, or social media chan- nels to request or verify per- sonal or financial information. This includes requests for per- sonal identification numbers (PINs), passwords, or similar information for credit cards, banks, or other financial ac- counts. •Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft , the IRS Identity Theft Central webpage, for information on identity theft and data security protection for taxpayers, tax professionals, and busi- nesses. If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related identity theft, you can learn what steps you should take. •Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are six-digit numbers assigned to taxpay- ers to help prevent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent federal income tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, it prevents someone else from filing a tax return with your SSN. T o learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN . Ways to check on the status of your refund. •Go to IRS.gov/Refunds . Publication 17 (2024) 129 --- Page 132 --- Page 132 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. •Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile device to check your refund status. •Call the automated refund hot- line at 800-829-1954. The IRS can’t issue re- funds before mid -February for returns that claimed the EIC or the additional child tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, not just the portion associated with these credits. Making a tax payment. Pay- ments of U.S. tax must be remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital assets are not accepted. Go to IRS.gov/Payments for information on how to make a payment using any of the following options. •IRS Direct Pay : Pay your indi- vidual tax bill or estimated tax payment directly from your checking or savings account at no cost to you. •Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet : Choose an ap- proved payment processor to pay online or by phone. •Electronic Funds Withdrawal : Schedule a payment when fil- ing your federal taxes using tax return preparation soft- ware or through a tax profes- sional. •Electronic Federal T ax Payment System : This is the best option for businesses. Enrollment is required. •Check or Money Order : Mail your payment to the address listed on the notice or instruc- tions. •Cash : Y ou may be able to pay your taxes with cash at a par- ticipating retail store. •Same-Day Wire : Y ou may be able to do same-day wire from your financial institution. Con- tact your financial institution for availability, cost, and time frames. Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption technology to ensure that the electronic payments you make online, by phone, or from a mobile device using the IRS2Go app are safe and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and faster than mailing in a check or money order. CAUTION!What if I can’t pay now? Go to IRS.gov/Payments for more infor- mation about your options. •Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/OPA ) to meet your tax obligation in monthly installments if you can’t pay your taxes in full to- day. Once you complete the online process, you will re- ceive immediate notification of whether your agreement has been approved. •Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if you can settle your tax debt for less than the full amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC . Filing an amended return. Go to IRS.gov/Form1040X for information and updates. Checking the status of your amended return. Go to IRS.gov/ WMAR to track the status of Form 1040-X amended returns. It can take up to 3 weeks from the date you filed your amended return for it to show up in our system, and pro- cessing it can take up to 16 weeks. Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve received. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional information about responding to an IRS notice or letter. IRS Document Upload Tool. Y ou may be able use the Docu- ment Upload T ool to respond digi- tally to eligible IRS notices and let- ters by securely uploading required documents online through IRS.gov. For more information, go to IRS.gov/DUT . Schedule LEP . Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 1040), Re- quest for Change in Language Preference, to state a preference to receive notices, letters, or other written communications from the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou may not immediately receive writ- ten communications in the reques- ted language. The IRS’s commit- ment to LEP taxpayers is part of a multi- year timeline that began pro- viding translations in 2023. Y ou will continue to receive communica- CAUTION!tions, including notices and letters, in English until they are translated to your preferred language. Contacting your local TAC. Keep in mind, many questions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting a TAC. Go to IRS.gov/ LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about most. If you still need help, TACs provide tax help when a tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs now provide service by appointment, so you’ll know in advance that you can get the service you need without long wait times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find the nearest TAC and to check hours, available services, and appoint- ment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us option and click on “Local Offices.” ————————————— Below is a message to you from the T axpayer Advocate Service, an independent organization estab- lished by Congress. The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) Is Here To Help You What Is the Taxpayer Advocate Service? The T axpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent organiza- tion within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). TAS helps taxpayers resolve problems with the IRS, makes administrative and legisla- tive recommendations to prevent or correct the problems, and protects taxpayer rights. We work to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you know and understand your rights under the T axpayer Bill of Rights. We are Y our Voice at the IRS. How Can TAS Help Me? TAS can help you resolve problems that you haven’t been able to re- solve with the IRS on your own. Al- ways try to resolve your problem with the IRS first, but if you can’t, then come to TAS. Our services are free. •TAS helps all taxpayers (and their representatives), includ- ing individuals, businesses, and exempt organizations. Y ou may be eligible for TAS help if your IRS problem is causing financial difficulty, if you’ve tried and been unable to resolve your issue with the IRS, or if you believe an IRS system, process, or procedure just isn't working as it should. •T o get help any time with gen- eral tax topics, visit www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.g ov. The site can help you with common tax issues and situa- tions, such as what to do if you make a mistake on your return or if you get a notice from the IRS. •TAS works to resolve large-scale (systemic) prob- lems that affect many taxpay- ers. Y ou can report systemic issues at www.IRS.gov/ SAMS . (Be sure not to include any personal identifiable infor- mation.) How Do I Contact TAS? TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. T o find your local advocate’s number: •Go to www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.g ov/Contact-Us , •Check your local directory, or •Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778. What Are My Rights as a Taxpayer? The T axpayer Bill of Rights de- scribes ten basic rights that all tax- payers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/ T axpayer-Rights for more informa- tion about the rights, what they mean to you, and how they apply to specific situations you may en- counter with the IRS. TAS strives to protect taxpayer rights and ensure the IRS is administering the tax law in a fair and equitable way. 130 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 133 --- Page 133 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries. See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us. Index 10% tax for early withdrawal from IRA or retirement plan (See Early withdrawal from deferred interest account, subheading: T ax on) 2024 Tax Rate Schedules 126 401(k) plans : T ax treatment of contributions 50 403(b) plans : Rollovers 85, 91 529 plans (See Qualified tuition programs) 59 1/2 rule : Age 59 1/2 rule 88 60-day rule 84 72 rule : Age 72 rule 86 A Abroad, citizens traveling or working 8, 52 (See also Foreign employment ) Absence, temporary 29, 34 Accelerated death benefits 70 Accident insurance 48 Cafeteria plans 53 Long-term care 48, 53 Accidental death benefits 49 Accounting methods 13 Accrual method (See Accrual method taxpayers) Cash method (See Cash method taxpayers) Accounting periods 13 Calendar year 11, 13, 48 Change in, standard deduction not allowed 93 Fiscal year 13, 42 Fringe benefits 48 Accrual method taxpayers 13 T axes paid during tax year, deduction of 97 Accuracy-related penalties 20 Activities not for profit 74 Address 17 Change of 18 Foreign 17 P .O. box 17 Adjusted gross income (AGI) : Modified (See Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI)) Retirement savings contribution credit 23 Adjustments 108 Administrators, estate (See Executors and administrators) Adopted child 27, 28, 35, 37 Adoption : ATIN 14 Child tax credit 110 Credits : Married filing separately 23 Employer assistance 49 T axpayer identification number 14, 37 Age : Children's investments (See Children, subheading: Investment income of child under age 18) Gross income and filing requirements (T able 1-1) 6 IRAs : Distribution prior to age 59 1/2 88Distribution required at age 7286, 88 Roth IRAs 89, 92 Standard deduction for age 65 or older 93 Age test 28 Agents : Income paid to 13 Signing return 15 Agricultural workers (See Farmers) Agriculture (See Farming) Alaska Permanent Fund dividends 74 Alaska Unemployment Compensation Fund 98 Alcoholic beverages : IRA prohibited transactions in 87 Aliens : Dual-status (See Dual-status taxpayers) Filing required 8 Nonresident (See Nonresident aliens) Resident (See Resident aliens) Alimony : Reporting of income 74 Alternative filing methods : Electronic (See E-file) Alternative minimum tax (AMT) 108 Ambulance service personnel : Life insurance proceeds when death in line of duty 70 Amended returns 19 (See also Form 1040-X ) Itemized deduction, change to standard deduction 95 Standard deduction, change to itemized deductions 95 American citizens abroad 7 (See also Citizens outside U.S. ) Employment (See Foreign employment) American Indians (See Indians) American Samoa : Income from 8 Annuities : Decedent's unrecovered investment in 14 IRAs as 79 Unrecovered investment 106 Withholding 14, 40 Annulled marriages : Filing status 22 Anthrax incidents (See T errorist attacks) Antiques (See Collectibles) Appraisal fees 102 Archer MSAs 77 Contributions 48 Armed Forces : Combat zone : Extension to file return 12 Signing return for spouse 23 Dependency allotments 35 Disability pay 52 Disability pensions 53 GI Bill benefits 36 Military quarters allotments 35 Real estate taxes when receiving housing allowance 99 Rehabilitative program payments 52 Retiree's pay withholding 38 Retirees' pay : T axable income 52 Wages 52Assistance (See T ax help) Assistance, tax (See T ax help) ATIN (Adoption taxpayer identification number) 14 Attachment of wages 13 Attachments to return 14 Attorney contingency fee : As income 75 Attorney fees, whistleblower awards : As income 75 Attorneys' fees 103, 104 Automatic extension of time to file 11, 12 Form 4868 11 Awards (See Prizes and awards) B Babysitting 47 Back pay, award for 47 Emotional distress damages under title VII of Civil Rights Act of 1964 75 Backup withholding 41, 44, 55 Penalties 41 Bad debts : Claim for refund 20 Recovery 71 Balance due 108 Bankruptcy : Canceled debt not deemed to be income 69 Banks : IRAs with 79 Barter income 67 Definition of bartering 67 Form 1099-B 68 Basis : Cost basis : IRAs for nondeductible contributions 83, 86 Beneficiaries 75 (See also Estate beneficiaries ) (See also T rust beneficiaries ) Bequests 75, 76 (See also Estate beneficiaries ) (See also Inheritance ) Birth of child 29 Head of household, qualifying person to file as 25, 26 Social security number to be obtained 37 Birth of dependent 34 Blind persons : Exemption from withholding 39 Standard deduction for 93, 94 Bonds : Amortization of premium 105 Issued at discount 60 Original issue discount 60 Sale of 60 Savings 57 T ax-exempt 60 Bonuses 39, 47, 77 Bookkeeping (See Recordkeeping requirements) Breach of contract : Damages as income 75 Bribes 75, 103 Brokers : IRAs with 79 Commissions 79, 80 Burial : Expenses 103 Business expenses : Job search expenses 77Reimbursements 39, 47 Returning excess business expenses 39 Business tax credits : Claim for refund 20 C Cafeteria plans 53 Calendar year taxpayers : Accounting periods 11, 13, 48 Filing due date 11 California Nonoccupational Disability Benefit Fund 98 Campaign contributions 75 Presidential Election Campaign Fund 14 Campaign expenses 104 Canada : Resident of 27, 34 Cancellation of debt 68 Exceptions to treatment as income 68 Capital assets : Coal and iron ore 73 Capital expenses 36 Capital gains or losses : Hobbies, sales from collections 76 Sale of personal items 77 Carpools 75 Carrybacks : Business tax credit carrybacks 20 Cars 50, 78 (See also T ravel and transportation ) Personal property taxes on, deduction of 101 Cash : Rebates 75 Cash method taxpayers 13 Real estate transactions, tax allocation 98 T axes paid during tax year, deduction of 97 Cash rebates 75 Casualty insurance : Reimbursements from 75 Casualty losses 102, 105 Certificates of deposit (CDs) 61, 78 (See also Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) ) Change of address 18 Change of name 13, 45 Chaplains : Life insurance proceeds when death in line of duty 70 Charitable contributions : Gifts to reduce public debt 17 Charitable distributions, qualified 86 Check-writing fees 104 Checks : Constructive receipt of 13 Child and dependent care credit : Married filing separately 23 Child born alive 29 Child care : Babysitting 47 Care providers 47 Expenses 37 Child custody 29 Child support 75 Child tax credit 8, 27, 109-111 Claiming the credit 111 Limit on credit 111 Publication 17 (2024) 131 --- Page 134 --- Page 134 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Child tax credit (Cont.) Limits 23 Married filing separately 23 Child, qualifying 27 Children 49 (See also Adoption ) Additional child tax credit 111 Adoption (See Adopted child) Babysitters 47 Birth of child : Head of household, qualifying person to file as 25, 26 Social security number to be obtained 37 Care providers 47 (See also Child care ) Credit for 8 (See also Child tax credit ) Custody of 29 Death of child : Head of household, qualifying person to file as 25, 26 Dividends of (See this heading: Investment income of child under age 18) Earnings of 8 Filing requirements 8 As dependents (T able 1-2) 7 Gifts to 55 Investment income of child under age 18 : Dependent filing requirements (T able 1-2) 7 Interest and dividends 8 Parents' election to report on Form 1040 or 1040-SR 8 Kidnapped 29, 34 Signing return, parent for child 15 Standard deduction for 93, 94 Stillborn 29 Support of (See Child support) T ax credit (See Child tax credit) T ransporting school children 78 Unearned income of 55 Chronic illness : Accelerated payment of life insurance proceeds (See Accelerated death benefits) Long-term care (See Long-term care insurance contracts) Citizen or resident test 27 Citizens outside U.S. : Earned income exclusion 3 Employment (See Foreign employment) Extension of time to file 12 Filing requirements 7 Withholding from IRA distributions 87 Civil suits 75 (See also Damages from lawsuits ) Civil tax penalties (See Penalties) Clergy 8 Housing 51 Real estate taxes when receiving housing allowance 99 Life insurance proceeds when chaplain died in line of duty 70 Pensions 51 Special income rules 51 Clerical help, deductibility of 102 Coal and iron ore 73 Collectibles : IRA investment in 87 Colleges and universities : Education costs 77 (See also Qualified tuition programs ) Combat zone : Extension to file return 12Signing return for spouse 23 Commissions 39 Advance 47 IRAs with brokers 79, 80 Sharing of (kickbacks) 77 Unearned, deduction for repayment of 47 Common law marriage 22 Community property 7, 58 IRAs 79 Married filing separately 24 Commuting expenses 104 Employer-provided commuter vehicle 50 Compensation 47 (See also Wages and salaries ) Defined for IRA purposes 79 Defined for Roth IRA purposes 89 Employee 47 Miscellaneous compensation 47 Nonemployee 76 Unemployment 73 Computation of tax 14 Equal amounts 14 Negative amounts 14 Rounding off dollars 14 Confidential information : Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction information 3 Constructive receipt of income 13, 61 Contributions 17, 75 (See also Campaign contributions ) (See also Charitable contributions ) Nontaxable combat pay 79 Political 104 Reservist repayments 79 Convenience fees 102 Conversion (See specific retirement or IRA plan) Cooperative housing : Real estate taxes, deduction of98 T axes that are deductible (T able 11-1) 100 Copyrights : Infringement damages 75 Royalties 72 Corporations 71 (See also S corporations ) Director fees as self-employment income 76 Corrections (See Errors) Cost basis : IRAs for nondeductible contributions 83, 86 Cost-of-living allowances 48 Coupon bonds 61 Court awards and damages (See Damages from lawsuits) Cousin 35 Credit cards : Benefits, taxability of insurance 75 Payment of taxes 3 Credit for child and dependent care expenses 109 Credit for other dependents 109, 111 Claiming the credit 111 Limit on credit 111 Qualifying person 111 Credit for the elderly or the disabled 109 Credit or debit cards : Payment of taxes 11 Credits 107, 109 American opportunity 23 Child tax (See Child tax credit) Credit for other dependents 109Earned income (See Earned income credit) Lifetime learning (See Lifetime learning credit) Custodial fees 103 Custody of child 29 D Damages from lawsuits 75 Dating your return 14 Daycare centers 47 (See also Child care ) De minimis benefits 49 Deadlines (See Due dates) Death (See Decedents) Death benefits : Accelerated 70 Life insurance proceeds (See Life insurance) Public safety officers who died or were killed in line of duty, tax exclusion 70 Death of child 29 Death of dependent 34 Debt instruments (See Bonds or Notes) Debts 20, 71 (See also Bad debts ) Canceled (See Cancellation of debt) Nonrecourse 68 Paid by another 13 Public, gifts to reduce 17 Recourse 68 Refund offset against 10, 15 Deceased taxpayers (See Decedents) Decedents 7 (See also Executors and administrators ) Deceased spouse 7 Due dates 11 Filing requirements 7 Savings bonds 58 Spouse's death 22 Standard deduction 93 Declaration of rights of taxpayers : IRS request for information 3 Deductions 71, 93 (See also Recovery of amounts previously deducted ) Casualty losses 105 Changing claim after filing, need to amend 19 Itemizing (See Itemized deductions) Pass-through entities 103 Repayments 72 Social security and railroad retirement benefits 66 Standard deduction 93, 95 Student loan interest deduction (See Student loans) Theft loss 105 Deferred compensation : Limit 50 Nonqualified plans 48 Delinquent taxes : Real estate transactions, tax allocation 99 Delivery services 11 Dependent taxpayer test 27 Dependents 8, 27 (See also Child tax credit ) Birth of 34 Born and died within year 13, 37 Death of 34 Filing requirements 8 Earned income, unearned income, and gross income levels (T able 1-2) 7Married, filing joint return 27, 32 Qualifying child 27 Qualifying relative 33 Social security number 13 Adoption taxpayer identification number 14, 37 Alien dependents 37 Standard deduction for 94 Dependents not allowed to claim dependents 27 Depletion allowance 73 Deposits : Loss on 103 Depreciation : Home computer 103 Differential wage payments 48 Differential wages : Wages for reservists : Military reserves 52 Direct deposit of refunds 15 Directors' fees 76 Disabilities, persons with : Accrued leave payment 53 Armed Forces 52 Blind (See Blind persons) Cafeteria plans 53 Credit for (See Elderly or disabled, credit for) Insurance costs 53 Military and government pensions 53 Public assistance benefits 74 Reporting of disability pension income 53 Retirement, pensions, and profit-sharing plans 53 Signing of return by court-appointed representative 15 Social security and railroad retirement benefits, deductions for 66 Workers' compensation 54 Disabled : Child 29 Dependent 35 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 : Withholding 41 Disaster relief 53, 74 (See also T errorist attacks ) Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act : Grants 74 Unemployment assistance 73 Grants or payments 74 Disclosure statement 21 Discount, bonds and notes issued at60 Distributions : Qualified charitable 86 Required minimum distributions 84, 86 (See also Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) ) Dividends : Alaska Permanent Fund (See Alaska Permanent Fund dividends) Fees to collect 103 Stockholder debts when canceled as68 Divorced parents 29, 33 Divorced taxpayers 74 (See also Alimony ) Child custody 29 Estimated tax payments 45 Filing status 22, 23 IRAs 80, 85 Real estate taxes, allocation of99 132 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 135 --- Page 135 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Domestic help : Withholding 38 Domestic help, can’t be claimed as dependent 27 Donations (See Charitable contributions) Down payment assistance 75 Dual-status taxpayers 8 Joint returns not available 23 Standard deduction 93 Due dates 10, 11 2024 dates (T able 1-5) 11 Extension (See Extension of time to file) Nonresident aliens' returns 11 Dues : Club 104 Dwelling units : Cooperative (See Cooperative housing) E E-file 3, 6, 8 Extensions of time to file 11 On time filing 11 Early withdrawal from deferred interest account : Higher education expenses, exception from penalty 78 IRAs : Early distributions, defined 88 Penalties 86, 88 Earned income : Defined : For purposes of standard deduction 94 Dependent filing requirements (T able 1-2) 7 Earned income credit 109 Filing claim 8 Married filing separately 23 Education : Savings bond program 59 Education credits : Married filing separately 23 Education expenses : Employer-provided (See Educational assistance) T uition (See Qualified tuition programs) Educational assistance : Employer-provided 49 Scholarships (See Scholarships and fellowships) T uition (See Qualified tuition programs) EIC (See Earned income credit) Elderly or disabled, credit for : Married filing separately 23 Elderly persons : Credit for (See Elderly or disabled, credit for) Exemption from withholding 39 Home for the aged 35 Long-term care (See Long-term care insurance contracts) Nutrition Program for the Elderly 74 Standard deduction for age 65 or older 93 T ax Counseling for the Elderly 10 Election precinct officials : Fees, reporting of 76 Elective deferrals : Limits 50 Electronic filing (See E-file) Electronic payment options 3 Electronic reporting : Returns (See E-file)Embezzlement : Reporting embezzled funds 76 Emergency medical service personnel : Life insurance proceeds when death in line of duty 70 Emotional distress damages 75 Employee benefits 48, 49 (See also Fringe benefits ) Employee business expenses : Reimbursements 39, 47 Returning excess 39 Employee expenses : Home computer 103 Miscellaneous 102 Employees 39, 48, 49 (See also Fringe benefits ) Awards for service 47 Business expenses (See Employee business expenses) Form W-4 to be filled out when starting new job 39 Fringe benefits 40 Jury duty pay 77 Overseas employment (See Foreign employment) Employers : E-file options 10 Educational assistance from (See Educational assistance) Form W-4, having new employees fill out 39 Overseas employment (See Foreign employment) Withholding rules 39 Employment : Agency fees 75 T axes 48 (See also Social security and Medicare taxes ) FICA withholding 12 (See also Withholding ) Employment taxes 38, 44 Endowment proceeds 70 Energy assistance 74 Energy conservation : Measures and modifications 75 Subsidies 75 Utility rebates 78 Equitable relief (See Innocent spouse relief) Errors : Corrected wage and tax statement 44 Discovery after filing, need to amend return 19 Refunds 18 Escrow : T axes placed in, when deductible 99 Estate beneficiaries : IRAs (See Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)) Losses of estate 75 Receiving income from estate 75 Estate tax : Deduction 101 Estates 75 (See also Estate beneficiaries ) Income 75 T ax 101, 105 (See also Estate tax ) Estimated : Credit for 45 Payment vouchers 43 Estimated tax 37 Amount to pay to avoid penalty 43 Avoiding 41 Change in estimated tax 43 Credit for 38, 44Definition 38 Divorced taxpayers 45 Figuring amount of tax 42 First period, no income subject to estimated tax in 43 Fiscal year taxpayers 42 Married taxpayers 41 Name change 45 Not required 41 Overpayment applied to 15 Payment vouchers 44 Payments 16, 43 Figuring amount of each payment 43 Schedule 42, 43 When to start 43 Who must make 41 Penalty for underpayment 38, 43, 45 Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule 42 Separate returns 45 Social security or railroad retirement benefits 64 State and local income taxes, deduction of 97 Unemployment compensation 73 Excise taxes 86 (See also Penalties ) Deductibility (T able 11-1) 100 IRAs for failure to take minimum distributions 86 Roth IRAs 91 Exclusions from gross income : Accelerated death benefits 70 Canceled debt 69 Commuting benefits for employees 50 De minimis benefits 49 Disability pensions of federal employees and military 53 Education Savings Bond Program 76 Educational assistance from employer 49 Elective deferrals, limit on exclusion 50 Employee awards 47 Energy conservation subsidies 75, 78 Foreign earned income 3 Frozen deposit interest 76 Group-term life insurance 50 Long-term care insurance contracts 53, 54 Parking fees, employer-provided 50 Public safety officers who died or were killed in line of duty, death benefits 70 Sale of home 77 Scholarships 77 Strike benefits 78 Executors and administrators 7 Exempt-interest dividends 56 Exemptions : From withholding 39 Expenses paid by another 75 Extension of time to file 11 Automatic 11, 12 Citizens outside U.S. 12 E-file options 11 Inclusion on return 12 F Failure to comply with tax laws (See Penalties) Fair rental value 36 Family 8, 110 (See also Child tax credit ) (See also Children )Farmers : Estimated tax 41 Withholding 38 Farming : Activity not for profit 74 Canceled debt, treatment of 69 Federal employees : Accrued leave payment 48 Cost-of-living allowances 48 Disability pensions 53 Based on years of service 53 Exclusion, conditions for 53 T errorist attack 53 FECA payments 54 Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) payments 54 Federal government : Employees (See Federal employees) Federal income tax : Not deductible 101 Deductibility (T able 11-1) 100 Federal judges : Employer retirement plan coverage 80 Fees 75 (See also specific types of deductions and income ) Professional license 104 Fellowships (See Scholarships and fellowships) FICA withholding 12, 38, 48 (See also Social security and Medicare taxes ) (See also Withholding ) Fiduciaries 7, 79, 80 (See also Executors and administrators ) (See also T rustees ) Fees for services 76 Prohibited transactions 87 Figuring taxes and credits 63, 107 (See also Worksheets ) Filing requirements 6-21, 23 (See also Married filing separately ) Calendar year filers 11 Citizens outside U.S. 7 Dependents 7, 8 Electronic (See E-file) Extensions 11 Gross income levels (T able 1-1) 6 Individual taxpayers 7 Joint filing 22, 23 (See also Joint returns ) Late filing penalties (See Penalties) Most taxpayers (T able 1-1) 6 Unmarried persons (See Single taxpayers) When to file 11 Where to file 17 Who must file 6, 8 Filing status 7, 21-26 Annulled marriages 22 Change to, after time of filing 19 Divorced taxpayers 22 Head of household 22, 24 Qualifying person to file as 25 Joint returns 22 Married filing separately 23 Surviving spouse 22 Unmarried persons 7, 22 (See also Single taxpayers ) Final return for decedent : Standard deduction 93 Financial institutions 79 (See also Banks ) Financially disabled persons 19 Fines 11, 20, 21 (See also Penalties ) Publication 17 (2024) 133 --- Page 136 --- Page 136 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Fines (Cont.) Deductibility 104 Firefighters : Life insurance proceeds when death in line of duty 70 Volunteer firefighters : IRAs 81 Fiscal year 13, 42 Fishermen : Indian fishing rights 76 Fishers : Estimated tax 41 Food benefits : Nutrition program for the elderly 74 Food stamps 35 Foreign employment 8, 52 Employment abroad 52 Social security and Medicare taxes 52 U.S. citizen 52 Waiver of alien status 52 Foreign governments, employees of52 Foreign income : Earned income exclusion 3 Reporting of 3 Foreign income taxes : Deduction of 98 Form 1116 to claim credit 101 Schedule A or Form 1040 or 1040-SR reporting 101 Definition of 97 Foreign nationals (See Resident aliens) Foreign students 27 Forgiveness of debt (See Cancellation of debt) Form 11, 51, 62 1040 27, 109 Alien taxpayer identification numbers 37 Armed Forces' retirement pay 52 Child care providers 47 Clergy pension 51 Corporate director fees 76 Disability retirement pay 53 FECA benefits 54 Foster-care providers 76 Kickbacks 77 Notary fees 76 Oil, gas, or mineral interest royalties 72 Rental income and expenses 72 Wages and salary reporting 47 Workers' compensation 54 1040 or 1040-SR : Address 17 Attachments to 14 IRAs 87, 89 Presidential Election Campaign Fund 14 Railroad retirement benefits, reporting on 64 Social security benefits, reporting on 64 Use of 22, 23 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule A : Charitable contributions 17 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule SE 8 1040-NR : Nonresident alien return 11 1040-X : Amended individual return 19 Annulled marriages 22 Change of filing status 24 Completing 19 Filing 19Itemized deduction, change to standard deduction 95 Standard deduction, change to itemized deductions 95 1040, Schedule A : Unearned commission, deduction for repayment of47 1040, Schedule C : Barter income 67 Child care providers 47 Corporate director fees 76 Forgiveness of debts 68 Foster-care providers 76 Kickbacks 77 Notary fees 76 Oil, gas, or mineral interest royalties 72 Rental income and expenses 72 1040, Schedule E : Royalties 72 1040, Schedule SE 51 1065 : Partnership income 71 1098 : Mortgage interest statement 71 1099 : T axable income report 12 1099-B : Barter income 68 1099-C : Cancellation of debt 68 1099-DIV : Dividend income statement 51 1099-G : State tax refunds 71 1099-INT 55, 62 1099-MISC : Nonemployee compensation 76 1099-OID 60 1099-R 59 IRA distributions 87, 89 Life insurance policy surrendered for cash 70 Retirement plan distributions 14 1120S : S corporation income 71 2555 111 2848 : Power of attorney and declaration of representative 15, 23 3115 58 3800 : General business credit 20 4506 17 4506-T : T ax return transcript request 17 4868 11, 37 Automatic extension of time to file 11, 37 Filing electronic form 11 Filing paper form 12 5329 : Required minimum distributions, failure to take 89 56: Notice Concerning Fiduciary Relationship 15 6251 108 8275 : Disclosure statement 218275-R : Regulation disclosure statement 21 8379 : Injured spouse claim 15 8606 : IRA contributions, Nondeductible 79, 83, 87 IRA contributions, Recharacterization of 86 8615 55 8814 55 8815 59 8822 : Change of address 18 8839 : Qualified adoption expenses 49 8853 : Accelerated death benefits 70 Archer MSAs and long-term care insurance contracts 48 8857 : Innocent spouse relief 23 8879 : Authorization for E-file provider to use self-selected PIN 11 9465 : Installment agreement request 17 Form 8919 : Uncollected social security and Medicare tax on wages 47 RRB-1042S : Railroad retirement benefits for nonresident aliens 62 RRB-1099 : Railroad retirement benefits 62 SS-5 : Social security number request 13, 37 SSA-1042S : Social security benefits for nonresident aliens 62 SSA-1099 : Social security benefits 62 W-2 : Election precinct officials' fees 76 Employer retirement plan participation indicated 80 Employer-reported income statement 12, 14, 47, 48, 51 Fringe benefits 48, 49 W-2G : Gambling winnings withholding statement 76 W-4V : Voluntary withholding request 73 W-7 : Individual taxpayer identification number request 37 W-7A : Adoption taxpayer identification number request 14, 37 Form 1040 : Estimated tax payments 45 Gambling winnings 40 Overpayment offset against next year's tax 43 Form 1040 or 1040-SR : Foreign income taxes, deduction of101Schedule A : State and local income taxes, deduction of 101 State benefit funds, mandatory contributions to98 T axes, deduction of 101 Schedule C : Real estate or personal property taxes on property used in business, deduction of 101 Schedule E : Real estate or personal property taxes on rental property, deduction of 101 Schedule F : Real estate or personal property taxes on property used in business, deduction of 101 Self-employment tax, deduction of101 Form 1040-ES : Estimated tax 42, 44 Form 1099-K : Payment card and third-party network transactions 77 Form 1099-MISC : Withheld state and local taxes 97 Form 1099-NEC : Withheld state and local taxes 97 Form 1099-R : Withheld state and local taxes shown on 97 Form 1099-S : Real estate transactions proceeds 99 Form 1116 : Foreign tax credit 101 Form 8332 : Release of exemption to noncustodial parent 30 Form W-2 : Employer-reported income statement 44 Filing with return 44 Separate form from each employer 44 Withheld state and local taxes 97 Form W-2c : Corrected wage and tax statement 44 Form W-2G : Gambling winnings withholding statement 40, 44 Withheld state and local taxes shown on 97 Form W-4 : Employee withholding allowance certificate 38, 39, 41 Form W-4S : Sick pay withholding request 40 Form W-4V 41 Unemployment compensation, voluntary withholding request 40 Form(s) 1099 44 Foster care : Care providers' payments 76 Child tax credit 110 Difficulty-of-care payments 76 Emergency foster care, maintaining space in home for76 Foster care payments and expenses 30, 35 Foster child 28, 30, 34, 35 Foster Grandparent Program 52 Found property 76 Fraud : Penalties 20, 40 134 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 137 --- Page 137 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Fraud (Cont.) Reporting anonymously to IRS 3 Fringe benefits : Accident and health insurance 48 Accounting period 48 Adoption, employer assistance 49 Archer MSA contributions 48 De minimis benefits 49 Education assistance 49 Form W-2 48 Group-term life insurance premiums 49 Holiday gifts 49 Retirement planning services 50 T axable income 48 T ransportation 50 Withholding 40 Frozen deposits : Interest on 76 IRA rollover period extension 84 Funeral expenses 37 Funerals : Clergy, payment for 51 Expenses 103 G Gains and losses 23 (See also Losses ) Claim for refund for loss 20 Gambling 105 Hobby losses 76 Passive activity 24 Gambling winnings and losses 76, 105 Withholding 40, 44 Garbage pickup : Deductibility (T able 11-1) 100 Garnishment and attachment 13 Gas royalties 73 Gems : IRA prohibited transactions in 87 General due dates, estimated tax 43 GI Bill benefits 36 Gift taxes : Not deductible 101 Gifts : Holiday gifts 49 Not taxed 76 T o reduce the public debt 17 Gold and silver : IRA investments in 87 Government employees : Federal (See Federal employees) Grants, disaster relief 74 Gratuities (See Tip income) Gross income : Age, higher filing threshold after 657 Defined 7 Filing requirements (T able 1-1) 6 Dependent filing requirements (T able 1-2) 7 Gross income test 35 Group-term life insurance : Accidental death benefits 49 Definition 49 Exclusion from income 50 Limitation on 49 Permanent benefits 49 T axable cost, calculation of 49 Guam : Income from 8H HAMP : Home affordable modification : Pay-for-performance 74 Handicapped persons (See Disabilities, persons with) Head of household 22, 24 Health : Flexible spending arrangement 48 Health insurance 48 (See also Accident insurance ) Reimbursement arrangement 49 Savings account 49 Health coverage tax credit 8 Health insurance premiums 36 Health Spa 104 Help (See T ax help) High income taxpayers : Estimated tax 41 Hobbies 103 Activity not for profit 74 Losses 76 Holiday gifts 49 Holiday, deadline falling on 42 Home : Aged, home for 35 Cost of keeping up 24 Worksheet 25 Security system 104 Homeowners' associations : Charges 101 Deductibility (T able 11-1) 100 Hope credit : Married filing separately 23 Host 70 Household furnishings : Antiques (See Collectibles) Household members 22 (See also Head of household ) Household workers (See Domestic help) Household workers, can’t claim as dependent 27 Housing 24 (See also Home ) Clergy 51 Cooperative (See Cooperative housing) I Icons, use of 3, 5 Identity theft 2, 21 Illegal activities : Reporting of 76 Income 47, 67, 74 (See also Alimony ) (See also Wages and salaries ) Bartering 67 Canceled debts 68 Constructive receipt of 13, 61 Gross 35 Illegal activities 78 Interest 54 Jury duty pay 77 Life insurance proceeds 70 Nonemployee compensation 76 Paid to agent 13 Paid to third party 13 Partnership 71 Prepaid 13 Recovery 71 Royalties 72 S corporation 71 T ax exempt 35 Underreported 19Income taxes : Federal (See Federal income tax) Foreign (See Foreign income taxes) State or local (See State or local income taxes) Income-producing expenses 102 Indians : Fishing rights 76 T axes collected by tribal governments, deduction of 97 Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) 78, 84, 89 (See also Rollovers ) (See also Roth IRAs ) Administrative fees 79, 80, 103 Age 59 1/2 for distribution 88 Exception to rule 88 Age 72 : Distributions required at 86, 88 Compensation, defined 79 Contribution limits 79, 80 Age 50 or older, 80 Under age 50, 80 Contributions 23, 24 Designating year for which contribution is made 80 Excess 87 Filing before contribution is made 80 Nondeductible 83 Not required annually 80 Roth IRA contribution for same year 90 Time of 80 Withdrawal before filing due date 86 Cost basis 83, 86 Deduction for 80 Participant covered by employer retirement plan (T able 9-1) 81 Participant not covered by employer retirement plan (T able 9-2) 82 Phaseout 81 Definition of 79 Distributions : At age 59 1/2 88 Required minimum distributions (See this heading: Required distributions) Divorced taxpayers 85 Early distributions (See Early withdrawal from deferred interest account) Employer retirement plan participants 80, 81 Establishing account 79 Time of 79 Where to open account 79 Excess contributions 87 Figuring modified AGI (Worksheet 9-1) 83 Forms to use : Form 1099-R for reporting distributions 87 Form 8606 for nondeductible contributions 79 Inherited IRAs 76, 83, 84 Required distributions 86 Interest on, treatment of 78 Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRAs 80, 81 Married couples (See this heading: Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRAs) Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) : Computation of 81Effect on deduction if covered by employer retirement plan (T able 9-1) 81 Effect on deduction if not covered by employer retirement plan (T able 9-2) 82 Worksheet 9-1 83 Nondeductible contributions 83 Early withdrawal 88 T ax on earnings on 83 Ordinary income, distributions as86 Penalties 87 Early distributions (See Early withdrawal from deferred interest account) Excess contributions 87 Form 8606 not filed for nondeductible contributions 79, 83 Overstatement of nondeductible contributions 83 Prohibited transactions 87 Required distributions, failure to take 86, 88 Prohibited transactions 87 Recharacterization of contribution 85 Reporting of : Distributions 87 Recharacterization of contributions 86 Required distributions 84, 86 Excess accumulations 88 Retirement savings contribution credit 23 Self-employed persons 79 T axability 88 Distributions 86 Time of taxation 79 T ransfers permitted 84 T o Roth IRAs 84, 85 T rustee administrative fees 103 T rustee-to-trustee transfers 84 IRA to Roth IRA 91 T ypes of 79 Withdrawals 86, 87 Early (See Early withdrawal from deferred interest account) Required (See this heading: Required distributions) Withholding 14, 40, 87 Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) 14, 37 Individual taxpayers (See Single taxpayers) Information returns 12, 14, 47, 48, 51 (See also Form 1099 ) (See also Form W-2 ) Partnerships to provide 71 Inheritance 75 (See also Estate beneficiaries ) IRAs (See Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)) Not taxed 76 Inheritance tax : Deductibility of 101 Deduction 101 Injured spouse 15 Claim for refund 15 Innocent spouse relief : Form 8857 23 Joint returns 23 Insolvency : Canceled debt not deemed to be income 69 Installment agreements 16 Publication 17 (2024) 135 --- Page 138 --- Page 138 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Insurance : Accident (See Accident insurance) Life 40, 49 (See also Group-term life insurance ) (See also Life insurance ) Reimbursements : From casualty insurance 75 Insurance companies : State delinquency proceedings, IRA distributions not made due to 89 Insurance premiums : Life 37, 104 Medical 36 Paid in advance 56 Insurance proceeds : Dividends, interest on 56 Installment payments 60 Life 60 Interest : Fees to collect 103 Frozen deposits 57 Usurious 57 Interest income 54 Form 1099-INT 12 Frozen deposits, from 76 Recovery of income, on 71 Savings bonds 76 (See also U.S. savings bonds ) T ax refunds, from 18 Interest payments 71 (See also Mortgages ) Canceled debt including 68 Student loans deduction 23 Interference with business operations : Damages as income 75 Internal Revenue Service (IRS) : Fraud or misconduct of employee, reporting anonymously 3 International employment (See Foreign employment) International organizations, employees of 52 Internet : Electronic filing over (See E-file) Investments : Fees 103 Seminars 104 IRAs (See Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)) Itemized deductions : Changing from standard to itemized deduction (or vice versa) 95 Choosing to itemize 94 Form 1040 to be used 71 Married filing separately 23, 95 One spouse has itemized 93 Recovery 71 Standard deduction to be compared with 94 State tax, for 95 ITIN (See Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN)) ITINs (See Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN)) J Job search : Deduction of expenses for Interviews 77 Joint accounts 55 Joint return test 27, 32 Joint returns : Accounting period 23 After separate return 24 Deceased spouse 22Dependents on 34 Divorced taxpayers 23 Estimated tax 41 Extension for citizens outside U.S. 12 Filing status 22 Fraud penalty 21 Guardian of spouse, signing as23 Injured spouse 15 Innocent spouse 23 Nonresident or dual-status alien spouse 23 Responsibility for 23 Separate return after joint 24 Signing 15, 23 Social security and railroad retirement benefits 67 State and local income taxes, deduction of 98 Judges, federal : Employer retirement plan coverage 80 Jury duty pay 77 K Kickbacks 77 Kiddie tax (See Children, subheading: Unearned income of) Kidnapped children : Qualifying child 29 Qualifying relative 34 L Labor unions 40 Dues and fees 78 Sick pay withholding under union agreements 40 Strike and lockout benefits 78 Unemployment compensation payments from 73 Late filing 3 Penalties 11, 20 Late payment : Penalties on tax payments 20 Law enforcement officers : Life insurance proceeds when death in line of duty 70 Legal expenses 103, 104 Liability insurance : Reimbursements from 75 License fees : Deductibility of 101 Nondeductibility of 103 Life insurance 49, 70 (See also Accelerated death benefits ) (See also Group-term life insurance ) Form 1099-R for surrender of policy for cash 70 Premiums 104 Proceeds 60 As income 70 Public safety officers who died or were killed in line of duty, tax exclusion 70 Surrender of policy for cash 70 Withholding 40 Life insurance premiums 37 Lifetime learning credit : Married filing separately 23 Limits : Miscellaneous deductions 102 Loans 20 (See also Debts ) Lobbying expenses 104 Local assessments : Deductibility of 100 Local income taxes, itemized deductions 95Local law violated 35 Lockout benefits 78 Lodging 36 Long-term care insurance contracts 53 Chronically ill individual 54, 70 Exclusion, limit of 54 Qualified services defined 54 Losses 20, 24 (See also Gains and losses ) Capital 24 Casualty 102, 105 Gambling (See Gambling winnings and losses) Theft 102, 105 Lost property 104 Lotteries and raffles 76 (See also Gambling winnings and losses ) M MAGI (See Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI)) Mailing returns (See T ax returns) Married dependents, filing joint return 27, 32 Married filing separately 23 Community property states 24 Credits, treatment of 23 Deductions : Changing method from or to itemized deductions 95 T reatment of 23 Earned income credit 23 How to file 23 Itemized deductions 23, 95 One spouse has itemized so other must as well 93 Joint state and local income taxes filed, but separate federal returns 97 Rollovers 23 Social security and railroad retirement benefits 64 State and local income taxes 97 T enants by the entirety, allocation of real estate taxes 99 Married taxpayers 22-24 (See also Joint returns ) (See also Married filing separately ) Age 65 or older spouse : Standard deduction 94 Blind spouse : Standard deduction 94 Deceased spouse 6, 7, 22 (See also Surviving spouse ) Dual-status alien spouse 23 Estimated tax 41, 42 Filing status 6, 7, 22 IRAs 80 Spouse covered by employer plan 80, 81 Living apart 22 Nonresident alien spouse 14, 23 Roth IRAs 89 Signatures when spouse unable to sign 15 Social security or railroad retirement benefits, taxability 63 Mass transit passes, employer-provided 50 Medical and dental expenses : Reimbursements, treatment of54 Medical insurance (See Accident insurance) Medical insurance premiums 36 Medical savings accounts (MSAs) 48, 77 (See also Archer MSAs )Medicare Advantage MSA 77 Medicare 48, 52 (See also Social security and Medicare taxes ) Benefits 74 Medicare Advantage MSA (See Medical savings accounts (MSAs)) Medicare taxes, not support 37 Member of household or relationship test 34 Mentally incompetent persons 53 (See also Disabilities, persons with ) Signing of return by court-appointed representative 15 Mexico : Resident of 27, 34 Military (See Armed forces) Mineral royalties 73 Ministers (See Clergy) Miscellaneous deductions 101 Missing children : Photographs of, included in IRS publications 3 Mistakes (See Errors) Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) : IRAs, computation for : Effect on deduction if covered by employer retirement plan (T able 9-1) 81, 83 Effect on deduction if not covered by employer retirement plan (T able 9-2) 82 Worksheet 9-1 83 Roth IRAs, computation for 89 Phaseout (T able 9-3) 89 Worksheet 9-2 89 Money market certificates 56 Mortgage : Relief 68 Mortgages : Assistance payments 74 Discounted mortgage loan 68 Interest : Refund of 71 MSAs (See Medical savings accounts (MSAs)) Multiple support agreement 37 Municipal bonds 60 Mutual funds : Nonpublicly offered 103 N Name change 13, 45 National Housing Act : Mortgage assistance 74 National of the United States 27 Native Americans (See Indians) Negligence penalties 20 Net operating losses : Refund of carryback 20 New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability Benefit Fund 98 New Jersey Unemployment Compensation Fund 98 New York Nonoccupational Disability Benefit Fund 98 Nobel Prize 77 Nominees 56, 61 Nonemployee compensation 76 Nonresident aliens 8 Due dates 11 Estimated tax 41 Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) 14 Spouse 14 Joint returns not available 23 Separated 24 136 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 139 --- Page 139 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Nonresident aliens (Cont.) Standard deduction 93 T axpayer identification number 37 Waiver of alien status 52 Northern Mariana Islands : Income from 8 Not-for-profit activities 74 Notary fees 76 Notes : Discounted 48, 60 Received for services 48 Nursing homes : Insurance for care in (See Long- term care insurance contracts) Nutrition Program for the Elderly 74 O OASDI 74 Occupational taxes : Deduction of : T axes that are deductible (T able 11-1) 100 Office rent, deductibility of 102 Offset against debts 10, 15 Oil, gas, and minerals : Future production sold 73 Royalties from 73 Schedule C or C-EZ 72 Sale of property interest 73 Options 51 Ordinary gain and loss (See Gains and losses) Original issue discount (OID) 60 Other taxes 108 Outplacement services 48 Overpayment of tax 15 (See also T ax refunds ) Overseas work (See Foreign employment) Overtime pay 39 P Paper vs. electronic return (See E- file) Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 3 Parental responsibility (See Children) Parents who never married 30 Parents, divorced or separated 29 Parking fees : Employer-provided fringe benefit : Exclusion from income 50 Partners and partnerships 103 Income 71 Pass-through entities 103 Passive activity : Losses 24 Patents : Infringement damages 75 Royalties 72 Payment of estimated tax 43 By check or money order 43 Credit an overpayment 43 Payment of tax 3, 10, 16, 19, 44 By credit or debit card 11 Delivery services 11 Estimated tax 16 Installment agreements (See Installment agreements) Late payment penalties 20 Payments 108, 109 Disaster relief 74 Payroll deductions 101 Payroll taxes 48 (See also Social security and Medicare taxes )Peace Corps allowances 52 Penalties 43, 45 Accuracy-related 20 Backup withholding 41 Civil penalties 20 Criminal 21 Deductibility 104 Defenses 20 Estimated tax (See this heading: Underpayment of estimated tax) Failure to include social security number 14, 21 Failure to pay tax 20 Form 8606 not filed for nondeductible IRA contributions 79, 83 Fraud 20, 21 Frivolous tax submission 21 Interest on 16 IRAs 87 Early distributions 88 Excess contributions 87 Form 8606 not filed for nondeductible contributions 79, 83 Overstatement of nondeductible contributions 83 Required distributions, failure to take 86 Late filing 11, 20 Exception 20 Late payment 20 Negligence 20 Reportable transaction understatements 20 Roth IRAs : Conversion contributions withdrawn in 5-year period 92 Excess contributions 91 Substantial understatement of income tax 20 T ax evasion 21 Underpayment of estimated tax 38, 43, 45 Willful failure to file 21 Withholding 40, 41 Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensation Fund 98 Pensions 38, 62 (See also Railroad retirement benefits ) Clergy 51 Contributions : Retirement savings contribution credit 23 T axation of 50 Decedent's unrecovered investment in 14 Disability pensions 53 Elective deferral limitation 50 Employer plans : Benefits from previous employer's plan 81 Rollover to IRA 85, 91 Situations in which no coverage 81 Inherited pensions 76 Military (See Armed Forces) Unrecovered investment in 106 Withholding 14, 40 Per capita taxes : Deductibility of 101 Personal exemption 37 Personal injury suits : Damages from 75 Personal property : Rental income from 72 Personal property taxes : Deduction of 101Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form 1040) 101 T axes (See Personal property taxes) Personal representatives (See Fiduciaries) Persons with disabilities (See Disabilities, persons with) Place for filing 17 Political campaign expenses 104 Political contributions (See Campaign contributions) Power of attorney 15, 23 Premature distributions (See Early withdrawal from deferred interest account) Prepaid : Insurance 56 Preparers of tax returns 15 Presidential Election Campaign Fund 14 Price reduced after purchase 69 Principal residence (See Home) Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction information 3 Private delivery services 11 Prizes and awards 47, 77 (See also Bonuses ) Exclusion from income 47 Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes 77 Scholarship prizes 77 Professional license fees 104 Professional Reputation 104 Profit-sharing plans : Withholding 14, 40 Property : Found 76 Stolen 78 Public assistance benefits 74 Public debt : Gifts to reduce 17 Public transportation passes, employer-provided 50 Publications (See T ax help) Puerto Rico : Residents of 7 Pulitzer Prize 77 Punitive damages : As income 75 Q Qualified opportunity fund 77 Qualified plans 84 (See also Rollovers ) Qualified tuition programs 77 Qualifying child 27 Qualifying relative 33 R Raffles 76 Railroad retirement benefits 62-67, 77 Deductions related to 66 Employer retirement plans different from 81 Equivalent tier 1 (social security equivalent benefit (SSEB)) 62, 77 Estimated tax 64 Form RRB-1042S for nonresident aliens 62 Form RRB-1099 62 Joint returns 67 Lump-sum election 64 Married filing separately 23, 64 Repayment of benefits 64 Reporting of 64 T axability of 63, 64 Withholding 41Not tax deductible 101 Withholding for 64 Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act 54 Real estate : Canceled business debt, treatment of 69 Division of real estate taxes 98 Form 1099-S to report sale proceeds 99 Itemized charges for services not deductible 100 Real estate-related items not deductible 100 T ransfer taxes 101 Real estate taxes : Assessments (See Local assessments) Cooperative housing 98 deduction of 98 Deduction of : List of deductible taxes (T able 11-1) 100 Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form 1040) 101 Refund, treatment of 99 Rebates (See Refunds) Recharacterization : IRA contributions 85 Recordkeeping : Gambling 105 Recordkeeping requirements 17 Basic records 17 Copies of returns 17 Electronic records 17 Gambling 76 Period of retention 18 Proof of payments 18 Why keep records 17 Recovery of amounts previously deducted 71 Itemized deductions 71 Mortgage interest refund 71 Over multiple years 71 T ax refunds 71 Refunds 108 State tax 71 T axes (See T ax refunds) Rehabilitative program payments 52 Reimbursement 71 (See also Recovery of amounts previously deducted ) Employee business expenses 47 Relationship test 27, 34 Relative, qualifying 33 Relief fund contributions 105 Religious organizations 8, 51 (See also Clergy ) Rental income and expenses : Increase due to higher real estate taxes 101 Deductibility (T able 11-1) 100 Losses from rental real estate activities 24 Personal property rental 72 Repayments 72 Amount previously included in income 106 Railroad retirement benefits 64 Social security benefits 64, 72 Unemployment compensation 73 Reporting : Rollovers 85 Required minimum distributions 84, 86 (See also Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) ) Rescue squad members : Life insurance proceeds when death in line of duty 70 Publication 17 (2024) 137 --- Page 140 --- Page 140 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Reservists : IRAs 81 Repayments 79 Residency : Home outside U.S. (See Citizens outside U.S.) Residency test 29 Resident aliens : Estimated tax 41 IRA distributions, withholding from 87 Social security number (SSN) 13 Spouse treated as 24 Retired Senior Volunteer Program 52 Retirees : Armed Forces : T axable income 52 Retirement planning services 50 Retirement plans 23, 38, 62 (See also Railroad retirement benefits ) (See also Roth IRAs ) Clergy 51 Contributions 50 Credit for (See Retirement savings contribution credit) T axation of 50 Decedent's unrecovered investment in 14 Disability pensions 53 Elective deferral limitation 50 Employer plans : Benefits from previous employer's plan 81 Rollover to IRA 85, 91 Situations in which no coverage 81 Inherited pensions 76 IRAs (See Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)) Military (See Armed Forces) Withholding 14, 40 Retirement savings contribution credit : Adjusted gross income limit 23 Returns, tax (See T ax returns) Rewards 77 Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefit Fund 98 Rollovers 84 Definition of 84 Excess due to incorrect rollover information 88 From 403 plan to IRA 84 From employer's plan to IRA 84, 85 From IRA to IRA 84 From IRA to Roth IRA 91 From Roth IRA to Roth IRA 92 From section 457 plan to IRA 84 From SIMPLE IRA to Roth IRA 92 Inherited IRAs 84 Married filing separately 23 Partial rollovers 84 Reporting : From employer's plan to IRA 85 IRA to IRA 84 T axability 84, 89 Time limits (60-day rule) 84 T reatment of 84 Waiting period between 84 Roth IRAs 89-92 (See also Rollovers ) Age: Distributions after age 59 1/2 92 No limit for contributions 89No required distribution age 92 Compensation, defined 89 Contribution limits 90 Age 50 or older, 90 Under age 50, 90 Contributions 89 No deduction for 89 Roth IRA only 90 Time to make 91 T o traditional IRA for same year 90 Conversion 91 Definition of 89 Distributions : Qualified distributions 92 Effect of modified AGI on contributions (T able 9-3) 89 Establishing account 89 Excess contributions 91 IRA transfer to 84, 85 Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) 89 Computation (Worksheet 9-2) 89 Phaseout (T able 9-3) 89 Penalties : Conversion contributions withdrawn in 5-year period 92 Excess contributions 91 Recharacterizations 85 Spousal contributions 89 T axability 92 Withdrawals 92 Excess contributions 91 Not taxable 92 Rounding off dollars 14 Royalties 72 S S corporations 103 Shareholders 71 Safe deposit box 103 Salaries (See Wages and salaries) Sale of home 77 Division of real estate taxes 98 Sale of property : Personal items 77 Sales and exchanges : Bonds 60 Saturday, deadline falling on 42 Savings : Bonds 57, 62 Bonds used for education 59 Certificate 56, 61 Schedule 17, 47, 51, 54 (See also Form 1040 ) (See also Form 1040 or 1040-SR ) Form 1040, A-F , R, SE (See Form 1040) K-1: Partnership income 71 S corporation income 71 K-1, Form 1041 55 Schedule A (Form 1040) : Itemized deductions 95 Schedules A–F , R, SE (Form 1040) (See Form 1040) Scholarships 32, 35, 37 Scholarships and fellowships : Earned income including 94 Exclusion from gross income 77 T eaching or research fellowships 77 Section 457 deferred compensation plans : Rollovers : T o IRAs 85, 91Securities : Claim for refund 20 Options 51 Stock appreciation rights 48 Self-employed persons 101 (See also Self-employment tax ) Corporate directors as 76 Definition 8 Foreign government or international organizations, U.S. citizens employed by 8 Gross income 7 IRAs 79 Ministers 8 Nonemployee compensation 76 Self-employment tax : Deduction of 101 List of deductible taxes (T able 11-1) 100 Seminars : Investment-related 104 Senior Companion Program 52 Separate returns (See Married filing separately) Separated parents 29, 33 Separated taxpayers 22 Filing status 23, 24 IRAs 80 Nonresident alien spouse 24 SEPs (See Simplified employee pensions (SEPs)) Series EE and E savings bonds 57 Series HH and H savings bonds 57 Series I savings bonds 57 Service charges 103 Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE) 52 Severance pay 48 Accrued leave payment 48 Outplacement services 48 Short tax year : Change in annual accounting period 93 Sick pay : Collective bargaining agreements 40 FECA payments 54 Income 48 Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act 54 Withholding 39, 40 Signatures 14 Agent, use of 15 Joint returns 23 Mentally incompetent 15 Parent for child 15 Physically disabled 15 Signing your return 9 Silver (See Gold and silver) SIMPLE plans : Rollover to Roth IRA 92 Simplified employee pensions (SEPs) : IRAs as 79 Single taxpayers 22 Filing requirements 7 Filing status 7, 22 Gross income filing requirements (T able 1-1) 6 Social security and Medicare taxes : Support, not included in 37 Social security benefits 35, 62, 67 Deductions related to 66 Employer retirement plans different from 81 Estimated tax 64 Foreign employer 52Form SSA-1042S for nonresident aliens 62 Form SSA-1099 62 IRAs for recipients of benefits 81 Joint returns 67 Lump-sum election 64 Married filing separately 23, 64 Paid by employer 48 Repayment of benefits 64, 72 Repayments 103 Reporting of 64 T axability of 63, 64 Withholding 41 Withholding for 64 Not deductible 101 Social security number (SSN) 13 Child's 2 Number to be obtained at birth 37 Correspondence with IRS, include SSN 14 Dependents 2, 13 Exception 13 Failure to include penalty 14 Form SS-5 to request number 13 Nonresident alien spouse 14 Resident aliens 13 Spouse 7, 14, 15, 22, 23, 70 (See also Married taxpayers ) Spouse's death 94 SSN (See Social security number (SSN)) Stamp taxes : Real estate transactions and 101 Stamps (See Collectibles) Standard deduction 93, 95 State : Obligations, interest on 60 State or local governments : Employees : Unemployment compensation 73 State or local income taxes 95 Deduction of 97 List of deductible taxes (T able 11-1) 100 Schedule A (Form 1040) 101 Electronic returns filed with federal 9 Exception to deduction 97 Federal changes, effect on 20 Form W-2 to show withheld taxes 97 Joint state and local returns but federal returns filed separately 97 Married filing separately 97 Refunds, treatment of 97, 98 State or local taxes : Refunds 71 Statute of limitations : Claim for refund 16 Claim for refunds 19 Stillborn child 29 Stock appreciation rights 48 Stock bonus plans 40 Stock options 51 Stockholders 20 (See also Securities ) Debts 68 Stockholders' meeting expenses 105 Stocks 20 (See also Securities ) Stolen funds : Reporting of 78 Stolen property 78 Strike benefits 78 Student loans : Cancellation of debt 68 138 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 141 --- Page 141 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Student loans (Cont.) Interest deduction : Married filing separately 23 Students : Defined 29 Exemption from withholding 39 Foreign 27 Loans (See Student loans) Scholarships (See Scholarships and fellowships) T uition programs, qualified (See Qualified tuition programs) Substitute forms 12 Sunday, deadline falling on 42 Supplemental wages 39 Support test : Qualifying child 30 Qualifying relative 35 Surviving spouse : Filing status 22 With dependent child 25 Gross income filing requirements (T able 1–1) 6 Life insurance proceeds paid to70 Single filing status 22 T ax (See Estate tax) Surviving Spouse (See Surviving spouse) T Tables and figures : Estimated tax, who must make payments (Figure 4-A) 42 Filing requirements : Dependents (T able 1-2) 7 Gross income levels (T able 1-1) 6 Head of household, qualifying person (T able 2-1) 24 Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) : Figuring modified AGI (Worksheet 9-1) 83 Modified AGI, effect on deduction if covered by retirement plan at work (T able 9 -1) 81 Modified AGI, effect on deduction if not covered by retirement plan at work (T able 9-2) 82 Roth IRAs, effect of modified AGI on contributions (T able 9-3) 89 Roth IRAs, modified AGI (Worksheet 9-2) 89 Roth IRA and modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) phaseout (T able 9-3) 89 Standard deduction tables 96 T ax returns : Due dates (T able 1-5) 11 Steps to prepare (T able 1-6) 12 T axes that are deductible (T able 11-1) 100 Tax computation worksheet 124 Tax Counseling for the Elderly 10 Tax credits (See Credits) Tax evasion 21 Tax figured by IRS 108 Tax help 4, 10, 128 T ax Counseling for the Elderly 10 Volunteer counseling (Volunteer Income T ax Assistance program) 10, 52 Tax preference items 108 Tax rates 22 Married filing separately (Schedule Y-2) 23Tax refunds : Agreement with IRS extending assessment period, claim based on 20 Bad debts 20 Business tax credit carrybacks 20 Cashing check 15 Check's expiration date 15 Claim for 18-20 Limitations period 19 Litigation 20 Direct deposit 15 Erroneous refunds 18 Federal income tax refunds 71 Financially disabled 19 Foreign tax paid or accrued 20 General rules 9 Inquiries 10 Interest on 18, 20, 56 Late filed returns 3 Limits 19 Exceptions 20 More or less than expected 15 Net operating loss carryback 20 Offset : Against debts 10, 15 Against next year's tax 15 Offset against next year's tax 43 Past-due 10, 18 Real estate taxes, treatment of99 Reduced 20 State and local income tax refunds 97, 98 State liability, effect on 20 Under $1 15 Withholding 8 Worthless securities 20 Tax returns 11, 14, 23 (See also Due dates ) (See also Joint Returns ) (See also Signatures ) Aliens 8 Amended 19, 95 (See also Form 1040-X ) Attachments to returns 14 Child 15 Copies of 17 Dating of 14 Filing of 6 (See also Filing requirements ) Forms to use 8 Free preparation help 10 How to file 12 Mailing of 17 Paid preparer 15 Payment with 16 Private delivery services 11 Steps to prepare (T able 1-6) 12 Third party designee 14 Who must file 6, 8 Tax Returns : T ranscript of 17 Tax table 112-123 Tax year 11, 13 (See also Accounting periods ) Tax-exempt : Bonds and other obligations 60 Income 105 Interest 60 Tax-exempt income 35 Taxes 38, 97-101, 107 Alternative minimum 108 Business taxes, deduction of 97 Deduction of 97 Schedules to use 101 T ypes of taxes deductible (T able 11-1) 100 Estate (See Estate tax)Excise (See Excise taxes) Federal income taxes, not deductible 101 Foreign taxes 97 Income tax, deduction of 98 Gift taxes 101 How to figure Income taxes, deduction of 97 Indian tribal government taxes, deduction of 97 Inheritance tax 101 Kiddie tax (See Children, subheading: Unearned income of) Not deductible 101 Personal property taxes : Deduction of 101 Real estate taxes (See Real estate taxes) Taxes, not support 37 Taxpayer identification number (TIN) : Adoption (ATIN) 14 Individual (ITIN) 14, 37 Social security number (See Social security number (SSN)) Telephones 105 Fraud or misconduct of IRS employee, number for reporting anonymously 3 Temporary absences 29, 34 Tenants : By the entirety 55 In common 55 Tenants by the entirety : Real estate taxes, allocation when filing separately 99 Terminal illness : Accelerated payment of life insurance proceeds (See Accelerated death benefits) Viatical settlements 70 Terrorist attacks : Disability pensions for federal employees 53 Theft losses 102, 105 Third parties : Designee for IRS to discuss return with 14 Income from taxpayer's property paid to 13 Tiebreaker rules 32 Tip income : Allocated tips 40 Withholding 40 Underwithholding 40 Total support 36 Tour guides : Free tour for organizing tour 76 Trade Act of 1974 : T rade readjustment allowances under 73 Traditional IRAs (See Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)) Transfer taxes : Real estate transactions and 101 Transit passes 50 Travel and transportation expenses : Commuting expenses : Employer-provided commuter vehicle 50 Expenses paid for others 105 Fringe benefits 50 Job search expenses 77 Parking fees : Employer-provided fringe benefit 50 School children, transporting of78T ransit pass 50 Treasury bills, notes, and bonds 59 Treasury Inspector General : T elephone number to report anonymously fraud or misconduct of IRS employee 3 Treasury notes 56 Trust beneficiaries : Losses of trust 75 Receiving income from trust 75, 76 Trustees : Administrative fees 103 IRA 103 IRAs : Fees 79, 80 T ransfer from trustee to trustee 84, 91 Trusts 75 (See also T rust beneficiaries ) Grantor trusts 75 Income 75 TTY/TDD information 128 Tuition : Qualified programs (See Qualified tuition programs) Tuition programs, qualified (See Qualified tuition programs) Tuition, benefits under GI Bill 36 U U.S. citizen or resident 27 U.S. national 27 U.S. obligations, interest 56, 57 U.S. savings bonds : Education, used for 23 Interest on 76 U.S. territories : Deduction of income tax paid to98 Income from 8 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds 59 U.S. Virgin Islands : Income from 8 Underpayment penalties 38, 43, 45 IRS computation 45 Unearned income : Children 55 Unearned income of child (See Children, subheading: Unearned income of) Unemployment compensation 73 Credit card insurance paying 75 Mandatory contributions to state funds, deduction of 98 Private fund, from 73 Repayment of benefits 73 Reporting on Form 1040 73 Supplemental benefits 73 Voluntary benefit fund contributions 105 Withholding 40, 73 Unions 40, 73, 78 (See also Labor unions ) Unmarried persons (See Single taxpayers) Usurious interest 57 Utilities : Energy conservation subsidies 75, 78 Rebates 78 V Veterans benefits 52 Retroactive determination 53 Publication 17 (2024) 139 --- Page 142 --- Page 142 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Veterans benefits (Cont.) Special statute of limitations. 53 Veterans' benefits : Educational assistance 77 Viatical settlements 70 VISTA volunteers 52 Volunteer firefighters : IRAs 81 Volunteer work 52 T ax counseling (Volunteer Income T ax Assistance program) 10, 52 Vouchers for payment of tax 43, 44 W W-2 form (See Form W-2) Wages and salaries 12, 47-54 (See also Form W-2 ) Accident and health insurance 48 Accrued leave payment 48 Adoption, employer assistance 49 Advance commissions 47 Allowances and reimbursements 39, 47 Archer MSA contributions 48 Awards and prizes 47 Babysitting 47 Back pay awards 47 Bonuses 47 Child care providers 47 Children's earnings 8 Clergy 51 De minimis benefits 49Elective deferrals 50 Employee achievement award 47 Employee compensation 47 Farmworkers 38 Foreign employer 52 Form W-2 (See Form W-2) Fringe benefits 48 Garnished 13 Government cost-of-living allowances 48 Household workers 38 Long-term care coverage 48 Military retirees 38, 52 Military service 52 Miscellaneous compensation 47 Note for services 48 Outplacement services 48 Religious orders 51 Restricted property 51 Dividends on restricted stock 51 Retirement plan contributions by employer 50 Severance pay 48 Sick pay 48, 54 Social security and Medicare taxes paid by employer 48 Stock appreciation rights 48 Stock options 51 Supplemental 39 Volunteer work 52 Withholding (See Withholding) War zone (See Combat zone)Washington State Supplemental Workmen's Compensation Fund 98 Welfare benefits 35, 74 What's new 1 Where to file 17 Winter energy payments 75 Withholding 12, 37 (See also Form W-2 ) Agricultural Act of 1949 payments 41 Changing amount withheld 38 For 2022 38 Checking amount of 38 Claim for refund 8 Commodity credit loans 41 Credit for 38, 44 Cumulative wage method 39 Definition 37 Determining amount to withhold 38, 39 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 payments 41 Employers, rules for 39 Exemption from 39 Federal income taxes, not deductible 101 Form W-4 : Provided by employer 39 Fringe benefits 40 Gambling winnings 40, 44 General rules 38 Highest rate, employer must withhold at if no W-4 39 Incorrect form 44 IRA distributions 87New job 38 Penalties 38, 40, 41 Pensions and annuities 14, 40 Railroad retirement benefits 41, 64 Repaying withheld tax 39 Salaries and wages 38 Separate returns 45 Sick pay 40 Social security benefits 41, 64 State and local income taxes, deduction for 97 Supplemental wages 39 Tips (See Tip income) Unemployment compensation 40, 73 Workers' compensation 54 Mandatory contributions to state funds, deduction of 98 Return to work 54 Worksheets : Head of household status and cost of keeping up home 25 Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs), modified AGI computation (Worksheet 9-1) 83 Roth IRA modified adjusted gross income (MAGI), computation (Worksheet 9-2) 89 Social security or railroad retirement benefits, to figure taxability 63, 64 Support test 31 Wristwatch 105 Write-offs (See Cancellation of debt) 140 Publication 17 (2024) --- Page 143 --- Page 143 of 143 Fileid: … ication-17/2024/b/xml/cycle02/source 6:16 - 23-Jan-2025 The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing. Where To File Mail your return to the address shown below that applies to you. If you want to use a private delivery service, see Private delivery services in chapter 1 . TIP Envelopes without enough postage will be returned to you by the post office. Y our envelope may need additional postage if it contains more than five pages or is oversized (for example, it is over 1/4 inch thick). Also, include your complete return address. IF you live in...THEN send your return to the address below if you are requesting a refund or are NOT enclosing a payment...OR send your return to the address below if you ARE enclosing a payment (check or money order)... Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, T ennesseeDepartment of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Austin, TX 73301-0002 Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 1214 Charlotte, NC 28201-1214 Alaska, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Kansas, Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, WyomingDepartment of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Ogden, UT 84201-0002Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 802501 Cincinnati, OH 45280-2501 Arizona, New Mexico Department of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Austin, TX 73301-0002Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 802501 Cincinnati, OH 45280-2501 Arkansas, Oklahoma Department of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Austin, TX 73301-0002Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 931000 Louisville, KY 40293-1000 Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Y ork, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia, WisconsinDepartment of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Kansas City, MO 64999-0002Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 931000 Louisville, KY 40293-1000 Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, T exas Department of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Austin, TX 73301-0002Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 1214 Charlotte, NC 28201-1214 Pennsylvania Department of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Kansas City, MO 64999-0002Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 802501 Cincinnati, OH 45280-2501 A foreign country, U.S. territory,* or use an APO or FPO address, or file Form 2555 or 4563, or are a dual-status alienDepartment of the T reasury Internal Revenue Service Austin, TX 73301-0215Internal Revenue Service P .O. Box 1303 Charlotte, NC 28201-1303 * If you live in American Samoa, Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Northern Mariana Islands, see Pub. 570. Publication 17 (2024) 141